Electrolyte-Gated Organic Field-Effect Transistor for Selective Reversible Ion Detection
Kerstin Schmoltner, Johannes Kofler, Andreas Klug, Emil J. W. List-Kratochvil
First published: 19 September 2013 https://doi.org/10.1002/adma.201303281Citations: 102
SectionsPDFTools Share
Graphical Abstract
An ion-sensitive electrolyte-gated organic field-effect transistor for selective and reversible detection of sodium (Na+) down to 10−6 M is presented. The inherent low voltage – high current operation of these transistors in combination with a state-of-the-art ion-selective membrane proves to be a novel, versatile modular sensor platform.

Description unavailable
Organic field-effect transistors (OFETs) have already been proven to be suitable candidates as transducers for various sensor applications.1-4 Owing to their intrinsic amplification, OFET based sensors typically reveal a high sensitivity. In conjunction with the outstanding features of organic electronic devices such as economic production, integration on flexible substrates and biocompatibility, low-cost disposable sensor assemblies are not a future vision anymore. Especially, the emerging fields of medical diagnostics and environmental monitoring require sensor platforms for in-situ sensing of ions and biological substances in appropriate aqueous media. Within these fields, sensor arrays for multiple ion detection (e.g., Na+, K+, Ca2+, pH) for biomedical diagnostics, food-monitoring as well as for industrial process- and water-control are of particular interest.5 Regarding these sensing applications, electrolyte-gated organic field-effect transistors (EGOFETs) are the transducers of choice. In contrast to conventional ion-sensitive OFETs5-9 or FETs (ISFETs),10-12 where the analyte is in contact with a solid gate dielectric, EGOFETs benefit from a direct contact between the organic semiconductor and the analyte. The electric double layer of high capacitance (1–10 μF cm−2) formed at this interface enables low-voltage operation, which ensures a water-stable operation window, while the achieved source-drain currents (in the range of a few μA)13-15 are sufficiently high for further signal processing.6

The high potential of electrolyte-gated OFETs was first indicated by Kergoat et al. who reported on the stable operation of water-gated OFETs.13 Recent advances in this field include the successful detection of biomolecules such as DNA, dopamine, enzymes and proteins.16-19 Additionally, the influence of pH and ionic strength of the electrolyte on the performance of EGOFETs were studied.3, 14 However, to our knowledge no organic ion-selective EGOFET has been shown.

With this contribution we demonstrate a novel, modular and versatile EGOFET-sensor platform for reversible and selective ion detection. Based on an electrolyte-gated poly(3-hexylthiophene) thin film transistor and a state-of-the-art sodium ion (Na+) selective membrane,20 a sensitive linear response in the range of 10−6 to 10−1 M Na+ with a slope of ≈62 mV dec-1 was achieved. Furthermore, this potentiometric sensor showed a reversible response and its selectivity was successfully tested against interfering potassium ions (K+). This new concept proves to be an important step towards a low-cost integrated ion-sensor array for selective multiple ion detection.

A schematic cross-section of the introduced ion-sensitive EGOFET is shown in Figure 1a, consisting of a bottom-contact poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) FET in direct contact with an optimized inner filling solution (water containing 10−2 M NaCl), acting as an electrolyte gate and separated via a polyvinylchloride (PVC) based ion-selective membrane (ISM) from the analyte. The latter is in contact with an Ag/AgCl (3 M KCl) reference electrode. The mounted flow cell enables a continuous exposure of the sensor device to different salt concentrations. This architecture is modular and facilitates the realization of ion-selective EGOFETs for the detection of various ions “simply” by introducing appropriate ISMs. The latter are well-established components which are usually applied in ion-selective electrodes.21-23 Due to their vast dissemination they are available with a large variety of different ionophore-doped sensing membranes.24 Their working principle is not based on a selective transport through the membrane as, for example, in case of filtration, osmosis or gas separation. In contrast, it relies on the ion movement over a few nanometers within the charge separation layer at the sample/membrane interface, leading to an activity-dependent membrane potential. A detailed explanation of the function of such ISMs is, for example, given by Bühlmann et al.24 Important sensor parameters such as lowest detection limit and selectivity can be tuned by modifying the membrane.25

Details are in the caption following the image
Figure 1
Open in figure viewer
PowerPoint
a) Cross section of an ion-sensitive EGOFET: the bulk potentials in case of equal ion concentration in the analyte and the inner filling solution (black) as well as in case of lower concentration in the analyte (red dashed) are illustrated. b) Semilogarithmic transfer curve of a typical P3HT-based EGOFET without (dashed line) and with implemented ISM using DI H2O (solid line) and 10−2 M Na+ solution (dotted line) as an analyte. c) Output characteristics of an ion-sensitive EGOFET using DI H2O as an analyte.
In contrast to other OFET sensor concepts, this approach is potentiometric and no direct modification of the organic semiconductor takes place, which leads to a higher overall device stability. Moreover, since no binding happens at the interface (such as with enzymes etc.),18 reversible detection is possible by simply flushing the device using a mounted flow cell. Thus no complex recovery process is needed.

Figure 1 also shows the transfer (b) and output (c) characteristics of a typical Na+ sensitive EGOFET with deionized (DI) water as analyte and a 10−2 M NaCl inner filling solution, exhibiting typical field-effect characteristics with a slight hysteresis. The transfer curve of this ion-sensitive EGOFET is shifted by ≈200 mV to the negative direction when the target ion in the analyte is increased to 10−2 M Na+. This threshold voltage (Vth) shift originates from a non-zero membrane potential. In detail, this Nernstian membrane potential (see Figure 1a and Equation 1 is determined by the ion activity difference between the analyte and the inner filling solution. As the ion activity of the inner filling solution is kept constant and the potential of the analyte is predefined through the Ag/AgCl gate electrode, the potential of the inner filling solution is modulated solely by the ion activity in the analyte (see Figure 1a). In fact, it is the potential of the inner filling solution (gate potential + membrane potential), hereby referred to as effective gate potential, which controls the source-drain current. Therefore, if the concentration of the target ion in the analyte is equal to the concentration in the inner filling solution (10−2 Na+), the membrane potential is zero and the effective gate voltage matches the applied gate voltage. Consequently no Vth shift is observed, and the characteristics are identical to an EGOFET without a Na+ selective membrane where the Ag/AgCl gate electrode is directly immersed into the inner filling solution (see Figure 1 b, dashed line). The reason for the insignificantly increased off-current of the transfer curve with an ISM (dotted line) is a slightly larger leakage current. The mobility with and without an ISM in the saturation region was estimated to be ≈2 × 10−2 cm2 V-1 s-1 using a typical capacitance of 3 μF cm-2 (for an Au/P3HT/water/Au system)13, which is in good agreement with other reported values.1, 13 These results clearly demonstrate that the implementation of an ISM does not influence the overall performance (on/off ratio ≈102, maximum channel currents of ≈10 μA) of the underlying EGOFET. However, when choosing the operational voltages, it is important to consider the effective applied gate potential which should be well below 0.7 V to ensure a stable device operation and to avoid degradation due to doping and hydrolyses. 13, 14

In order to demonstrate the sensitivity of the ion-selective EGOFET to Na+, the source-drain current was recorded at a constant gate and source-drain potential while the Na+ concentration in the water (analyte) was increased stepwise (see Figure 2a, VDS = -0.1 V, VGS = -0.2 V). The Na+ concentration was adjusted by adding a certain amount of different saline solutions (10−4 – 10−1 M NaCl) to a larger reservoir (200 ml DI H2O beaker) which was connected via PVC tubing to the flow cell and further to retracing micro syringes, producing a constant flow of 1 ml/min. As a sensitive response a source-drain current decrease of ≈250–500 nA dec-1 (depending on the point of operation) was observed while varying the Na+ concentration between 10−6 M and 10−1 M. The source-drain current decrease reflects the change in effective gate potential. The latter can be calculated by using the fitted transfer curve at VSD = -0.1 V (see Supporting Information) of the EGOFET without an ISM. Alternatively, the transfer curve of the EGOFET with an ISM can be used (as mentioned before), if the Na+ concentration in the inner filling solution and the analytes are equal. Figure 2b shows the calculated effective gate voltage versus the Na+ concentration following a linear relation with a slope of 62 mV dec-1. Accordingly, the ion-selective PVC membranes were also tested in an ion-selective electrode configuration and the electrical characterization revealed a sensitive response of about 52 mV dec-1 (see Supporting Information). Both values are in good agreement with the theoretically predicted value of 59.2 mV dec-1, calculated from the Nernst equation at 25 °C, which describes the membrane potential across the membrane as follows23
urn:x-wiley:09359648:adma201303281:equation:adma201303281-math-0001
(1)
where E0 is a constant, R the gas constant, zi the valency of the analyte ion, F the Faraday's constant and a the corresponding activity of the target ion in the analyte and the inner filling solution, respectively. Variations of about ≈7 mV dec-1 are in the expected error range, considering the fitting model for the EGOFET transfer curve as well as degradation effects due to the long continuous measurements. Nevertheless, the obtained values for the effective applied gate potential represent good estimations.
Details are in the caption following the image
Figure 2
Open in figure viewer
PowerPoint
a) Source-drain current response to increasing Na+ concentration of a typical ion-sensitive EGOFET with a PVC ion-selective membrane, exhibiting a response time of ≈30 s (see inset). b) Calculated effective gate potential versus Na+ concentration (see Supporting Information).
The implementation of a flow cell was necessary to obtain a reversible sensor response and to lower the detection limit from 10−5 M Na+ down to ≈10−6 M Na+.26 This can be clearly seen by comparing the source-drain current before and after applying a flow of DI water through the cell (see Figure 2, first 300 s): if there is no flow, ions which diffuse out of the inner filling solution into the analyte lead to an artifically increased ion concentration in the vicinity of the ISM.27 This results in a decreased effective gate potential and further to a decreased source-drain current. If a flow is applied (after 300 s), this concentration is lowered, leading to a higher effective gate potential and consequently also to a higher source-drain current. These low Na+ concentrations and the resulting high effective gate voltages (here < -400 mV) lead to significant drifts (decreasing channel currents, see Figure 2a, 200–400 s). By increasing the concentration the effective applied gate voltage is decreased and the drift is reduced until it almost vanishes completely. Moreover, since no significant drift occurred when no voltages were applied, its origin is most probably ascribed to the electrolysis of water at the electrolyte/semiconductor interface leading to device degradation. This drift can in principle be avoided by keeping the effective gate potential constant at a stable operating point, regardless of the ion concentration in the analyte. However, this requires a readjusting of the gate potential by an appropriate feedback mechanism.28, 29 The according adjustment of the gate potential corresponds directly to the membrane potential change and thus to the ion concentration in the analyte. An appropriate read-out circuit is currently under investigation.

Moreover, note that the herein reported lowest detection limit (10−6 M Na+) is not a property of the ion-sensitive EGOFET itself, but is rather determined by the ISM and the inner filling solution. In detail, ion fluxes through the membrane typically limit the lowest detection limit. Suppression of these fluxes which leads to detection limits in the nano-molar range can be achieved e.g., by using thicker membranes or a lower Na+ concentration in the inner filling solution.25, 26, 30

Furthermore, the response time of ≈30 s is not a property of the ISM itself but rather related to how quickly the concentration within the flow cell reaches the concentration of the large reservoir (mixing time).24 Consequently, the response time can be lowered by increasing the flow rate and decreasing the dead volume.

The reversible and selective response of the ion-sensitive EGOFET is shown in Figure 3. It demonstrates a rather fast response when the concentration was varied between 10−4 M Na+ (base line) and 10−3 M Na+. The selective response was tested with K+ as interfering ion following 3 Na+ concentration variation steps. The K+ concentration was increased in a 10−4 M Na+ background solution to 10−2 M K+ (two orders of magnitude), showing a current variation of about 7%. In comparison, by increasing from 10−4 M to 10−3 M Na+ (one order of magnitude), a 5 times higher current change was detected, confirming the selectivity of the ion-sensitive EGOFET to Na+ ions. When the same PVC ISM was also characterized with respect to selectivity in an ion-selective electrode configuration between a range of 10−6 – 10−1 M K+, the significant selective response to Na+ could be confirmed (see Supporting Information). The long-term current drift of ≈0.3% per minute at a reasonable gate voltage (see Figure 3), can be most likely ascribed to bias-stress effects. The long-term stability31 of the newly presented ion sensor is not a main topic in this letter but will be one of the challenges for the future when pursuing highly promising sensor concepts based on EGOFETs. However, considering the utilization of the presented ion sensor for rapid self-testing applications, the obtained small drifts during operation are in an acceptable range.

Details are in the caption following the image
Figure 3
Open in figure viewer
PowerPoint
Response curve of a Na+ selective EGOFET. The source-drain current was measured while the Na+ concentrations were changed rapidly from 10−4 to 10−3 M and back. The selectivity was investigated by adding K+ to a 10−4 M Na+ background solution to obtain 10−2 M K+.
In conclusion, we have successfully demonstrated a novel sensor platform based on electrolyte-gated OFETs for selective and reversible ion detection. The novelty of this design compared to conventional ISFETs is the direct contact between the electrolyte and the semiconductor without the use of a solid dielectric, making low-voltage operation in aqueous media feasible. Furthermore, this architecture benefits from a modular approach, allowing for the detection of various ions simply by choosing an appropriate ion-selective membrane. The presented potentiometric sensor based on a Na+ sensitive PVC membrane showed a Nernstian behavior for a broad detection range between 10−6 M and 10−1 M Na+. Moreover, a selective as well as reversible sensor response without a complex recovering process was achieved. These results constitute an important step towards a low-cost integrated sensor array for multiple ion detection facilitated by a facile integration of different state-of-the-art ISMs, being of high relevance for biomedical diagnostics, food-monitoring, industrial process- and water-control.

Experimental Section
The reservoir and the flow cell for the ion-sensitive EGOFETs were made of polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS, Sylgard 184) via a soft molding process, including a curing step of ≈1 h at 100 °C. In order to seal off the flow cell and the reservoir of the inner filling solution, a pressure was applied by an appropriate fixture. The EGOFETs were fabricated on PET substrates (Melinex, DuPont Teijin Films) and the 50 nm gold source/drain (S/D) electrodes with 2 nm chromium adhesion layer were structured using conventional lift-off processing (channel length ≈7 μm, channel width ≈3 mm). Regioregular poly(3-hexylthiophene) (Plexcore OS purchased from Sigma-Aldrich) was deposited via spin-coating from a 4 g L-1 toluene solution and dried at 60 °C in Argon (Ar) for ≈10 min and subsequently at 120 °C under high vacuum (p ≈ 4 × 10-5 mbar) for 1 h. All devices were assembled under inert atmosphere. In order to obtain a sensitive as well as selective response to sodium ions, a state-of-the-art ionophore-doped PVC based ISM as described by A. Cadogan20 was introduced. The ISM membranes were prepared by drop-casting a high molecular weight polyvinyl chloride (31 wt%, Selectophore grade), 2-nitrophenyl octyl ether (2-NPOE) (68 wt%), potassium tetrakis-((4-chlorophenyl)borate (KTpClPB) (0.7 wt%) and sodium ionophore X (0.2 wt%) in 5 mL tetrahydrofuran (THF) cocktail onto a glass slide. The drop-cast membrane was allowed to dry overnight at ambient conditions and was peeled off the glass slide for further implementation. All of the chemicals mentioned above were obtained from Fluka Sigma-Aldrich and were used as received. Saline solutions were prepared in concentrations varying from 10−4 M to 10−1 M NaCl (99.5%, p.a., ACS, ISO) and KCl (>99.0%) in deionized water, respesctively. The electrical characterization of all devices was done in ambient air conditions (at same light conditions) using an Agilent B1500 Parameter Analyzer. Gradual channel approximation was used to calculate the field-effect mobility in the saturation regime.
Supporting Information for Adv. Mater., DOI: 10.1002/adma. 201303281 Electrolyte-Gated Organic Field-Effect Transistor for Selective Reversible Ion Detection Kerstin Schmoltner, Johannes Kofler, Andreas Klug, and Emil J. W. List-Kratochvil* Copyright WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, 69469 Weinheim, Germany, 2013. Supporting Information  for Adv. Mater., DOI: 10.1002/adma.201303281  Electrolyte-gated organic field-effect transistor for selective reversible ion detection Kerstin Schmoltner, Johannes Kofler, Andreas Klug, Emil J. W. List-Kratochvil* K. Schmoltner, J. Kofler, Dr. A. Klug, Prof. Dr. E. J. W. List-Kratochvil NanoTecCenter Weiz Forschungsgesellschaft mbH  Franz-Pichler Straße 32, A-8160 Weiz, Austria E-mail: E.List@tugraz.at Prof. Dr. E. J. W. List-Kratochvil Institute of Solid State Physics,  Graz University of Technology Petersgasse 32, A-8010 Graz, Austria Before the ion-selective PVC based membranes (ISMs) were implemented into the EGOFET architecture, they were characterized with respect to sensitivity and selectivity in a typical ion-selective electrode configuration. A 10-2 M NaCl inner filling solution and two Ag/AgCl reference electrodes were used, resulting in the following setup: Ag/AgCl electrode / 10-2 M NaCl / ISM / analyte / Ag/AgCl electrode. To investigate the sensitivity to Na+, the salt concentration was stepwise increased by adding saline solutions with a certain amount of NaCl (10-4 M – 10-1 M NaCl) to the analyte, while stirring and recording the potential difference (via a Keithley voltmeter) (see Figure S1(a)). In addition, the response of the membrane to the interfering ion K+ was measured by using KCl as an analyte. The results are presented in Figure S1 and S2, showing a significant sensitive and selective response to Na+. 1 Figure S1. Potentiometric response of the PVC ISM while increasing the Na+ (a) and the K+ (b) concentration stepwise. The lowest detection limit of the target ion was determined to be ~10-6 M Na+ (see Figure S2). The results show a nice linear behavior in the range of 5 x 10-6 M to 10-1 M Na+ with a slope of 52 mV/dec, compared to 58 mV/dec as reported in literature.[1] The response curve for K+ revealed a slope of 46 mV/dec, but a much smaller linear range between 5 x 10-3 and 10-1 M K+. This clearly demonstrates the Na+ selectivity of the applied membrane.  Figure S2. Potentiometric response versus the logarithmically plotted concentration of Na+ (full symbols) and K+ (open symbols). 2 Transfer curve and fit parameter of an electrolyte-gated ion-sensitive field-effect transistor  Figure S3 (a) shows the transfer curve of an EGOFET without an ion-selective membrane in a 10-2 M NaCl electrolyte solution, gated via an Ag/AgCl reference electrode. This measurement was performed before the sensitivity evaluation was carried out at a constant operating point (VDS = -0.1 V, VGS = -0.2 V) (see Figure 2 in the main text). Figure S3 (b) depicts the square root of the source-drain current versus the gate voltage including a corresponding polynomial fit. This equation (see Figure S3 (b)), which describes the correlation of the gate voltage with the source-drain current, is required to estimate the effective applied gate voltage during the sensitivity measurements (see Figure 2 (b) in the main text). Since drifts during the measurements cannot be totally excluded, the obtained values should be considered as estimations.  Figure S3. Semilogarithmic transfer curve of a typical EGOFET without an ion-selective membrane (a). Square root of the source-drain current versus the gate voltage and corresponding polynomial fit (b). 