Non-enzymatic glucose detection using nanocomposite decorated Cellulose-Based field effect transistor - a green electronics approach
Author links open overlay panel
Kodiaka Ayshathil Bushra a
, 
Kariate Sudhakara Prasad a b 1

Show more

Add to Mendeley

Share

Cite
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.microc.2023.108755
Get rights and content
Highlights
•
Ag-rGO nanocomposite decorated paper-based field effect transistor (PFET).
•
Cellulose as a dielectric and an active channel layer brings the concept of green electronics.
•
Low-voltage PFET biosensor for non-enzymatic glucose measurement in commercial energy drinks and artificial urine samples.
Abstract
Cellulose portrays suitable substrate material for biodegradable, cheaper, and sustainable electronic devices making it an alternative to traditional silicon/plastic materials. Additionally, field-effect transistors (FET) engross huge demand in biosensing applications owing to high amplification factors and work like transducers. Herein, fabrication, and the applicability of an eco-friendly, flexible, nanocomposite-decorated cellulose-based paper FET (PFET) chip, are demonstrated. Having cellulose as a dielectric as well as an active channel layer for depositing nanocomposite materials, and electrodes made of silver (Ag) ink, the as-fabricated PFET brings the concept of green electronics. The device exhibited good electrical and electronic behaviour having high electron and hole mobility (µe and µh) 3641 cm2V-1S-1 and 2436 cm2V-1S-1 in the absence and 8823 cm2V-1S-1 and 9116 cm2V-1S-1 respectively in the presence of glucose. Moreover, when tested for non-enzymatic glucose sensing under physiological pH conditions, a linear range from 0.1 mM to 5 mM with a low limit of detection (LOD) of 3 µM was observed. Finally, with satisfactory results, we proved the practical applicability of low-voltage PFET biosensors by measuring the glucose content in commercially available energy drinks and artificial urine samples. Hence, we developed a high-performance PFET chip utilising the circular economy concept with an optimised device structure and sensing techniques. We envisage that the device could enable real-time monitoring of glucose levels in commercially available drinks and diabetic urine samples.
Graphical abstract

Download: Download high-res image (66KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Previous article in issue
Next article in issue
Keywords
Paper FETNon-enzymatic sensingGlucoseBiosensor
1. Introduction
In the present modern era, with the advanced technological development, substantial use of digital equipment has become part of our day-to-day lives leading to huge non-recyclable electronic waste. With emerging demand for enormous renewable resources to implement the circular economy concept, researchers consider leather, cotton, and biopolymers, including paper, as alternative materials for eco-friendly electronic device making [[1], [2]]. Cellulose, the naturally available renewable resource, garnered vast interest in sustainable electronic applications owing to its availability in abundance, mass production, and lower price [3]. Cellulose offers compatibility with diverse manufacturing processes, stability, and scalability. However, a highly porous structure with a rough surface limits the quality of the paper-made devices. Fortunately, numerous coating or layering techniques have been found to overcome these limitations [4].
The paper electronic devices exploit applications in various fields such as power supply/storage, logic circuits, microfluidic devices, electronic storage systems, printed electronic circuits, lab-to–fab biosensing /biomedical device making, and miniaturised volatile gas/compound sensing [[5], [6], [7], [8]]. Additionally, emerging market demand for point-of-care, eco-friendly, palm-size, wearable, and remote/continuous health monitoring devices expanded their applications. Recent detailed reviews demonstrated the impact of biodegradable green electronic devices on the global market [[9], [10], [11]].
Among active/passive electronic devices, FETs are an important functional part of electronic circuits, having high input impedance and an amplification factor much higher than traditional bipolar junction transistors (BJTs) [[5], [12], [13]]. Current boosting, in conjunction with the fast-switching nature, is highly suitable for sensing applications. Traditionally FETs are prepared on a silicon substrate, but added to the limitation mentioned above, the requirement of high temperature, sophisticated fabrication techniques, and poor flexibility, researchers look forward to an alternative platform. Even though plastic substrates are flexible, biodegradability and environmental imperilments are significant issues [14].
Multiple fabrication techniques are employed for the PFET fabrication with cellulose as either dielectric or substrate material and are application specific. Chromatography paper is economical among nanofibril cellulose (NFC)/microfibril cellulose (MFC) varieties. It enables the lateral flow of liquid independent of any external pumping through microfluidic channels, and its porous nature helps hold the liquid in place [[15], [16], [17], [18]]. Solid-state dielectrics made with such paper are found ionically conducting and electronically insulating. The large dielectric constant and resistance of microfibril make cellulose a suitable material for gate dielectric in PFETs [[19], [20], [21]]. Here, the mechanism of using paper as a dielectric varies from conventional metal oxide semiconductor FETs (MOSFETs). By attaching the semiconducting layer (channel) between the source (S) and drain (D) electrodes, gate (G) is separated from the channel layer by an electrolyte (spiked target analyte on cellulose dielectric layer), resulting in a parallel plate capacitance. Based on applied external bias voltage together with the nature of the active channel doping, positively charged particles get displaced and accumulated at one side channel-paper junction (dielectric), simultaneously negatively charged particles with equal density induced in the opposite side or vice versa forming an electric double layer (EDL) [22]. These charged particles, with the influence of external potential, move in either direction through the channel and reach the external circuit, thus producing an output current. The capacitance due to EDL formation is independent of the thickness of the paper but influenced by free charge carriers within the hydroxyl groups (proton = hydrogen ion (H + ) or nucleon) of the paper matrix due to hopping and water content inside the paper. Hence care should be taken during the fabrication of PFETs [[23], [24]]. In addition, by employing PFET-based sensors, one can achieve the necessities required for point-of-care (POC) biosensing devices, such as compactness, seamless integration with other devices, eco-friendliness, lightweight, minimum power utilisation, sensitivity, selectivity, current amplification ability, and comparatively reduced detection limits [[19], [20], [25], [26], [27], [28], [29]].
Monitoring of glucose is essential for disease diagnosis with high sensitivity and selectivity. Due to simple fabrication techniques with outstanding properties and unprecedented room for portability, hybrid FETs have shown remarkable opportunities for enzymatic and non-enzymatic glucose detection [[19], [30], [31]]. High dependency on environmental conditions and denaturation limits enzymatic glucose sensors. In contrast, the non-enzymatic sensing approach enhances the electron charge transfer and produces the most stable responses with a low limit of detection (LOD). Despite the advantages, non-enzymatic glucose sensing devices stress usability with enhanced performance, affordability, and sustainability [[32], [33]]. Having said that, incorporating two-dimensional (2D) reduced graphene oxide (rGO) containing hydroxyl, carboxylic, epoxy, and carbonyl groups provides unique electronic and structural properties suitable for fabricating flexible thin layers. The hydrophilic nature of these functional groups facilitates interaction with biomolecules, and such properties are essential for developing biosensing devices. Moreover, defective sites of rGO are well suited for metal nanoparticle (NP) decoration and show Nernstian response with fast electron transport [[34], [35]].
In the current study, we successfully fabricated PFET using reduced graphene oxide decorated with a silver nanoparticle (Ag-rGO) as a semiconducting channel and demonstrated its application for non-enzymatic glucose sensing. Herein, Ag-rGO nanocomposite is coated onto a chromatography paper substrate as a channel material. Highly conductive Ag paste deposited for S, D, and G electrode contacts. The performance parameters extracted from electrical characterisation, such as electron mobility/hole mobility (µe /µh), threshold voltage (VT), capacitance (CI), current ON-OFF ratio (ION/IOFF), and subthreshold swing (SS), showed good transistor characteristics. The resultant flexible electronic device exhibited almost stable performance and fast response (∼2 s) for glucose detection in the physiological pH range with a low detection limit compared to conventional electrochemical approaches [[36], [37]].
1.1. Principle of PFET for glucose sensing
With applied external potential, spiking glucose at physiological pH in the Ag-rGO platform oxidises into d-glucono-δ-lactone, which later yields d-gluconate with a hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) / (H + ) ion as a byproduct. d-gluconate further hydrolyses into gluconic acid under silver (Ag) NP. The engrossed oxygen undergoes a reduction in the proximity of yielded H + ion, releasing an electron and thus causing an external current. The Ag NP is stable in water and conversely undergoes dissolution (oxidation) under the influence of H2O2 / oxygen (O2), releasing reactive Ag + [38]. The resultant charged particles contribute to developing EDL in FETs [39]. Overall, Ag NP takes a crucial role in glucose sensing due to electro-oxidation/reduction of glucose and finally forming EDL. The electro-catalytic activity of NP-decorated rGO was consistent with plotted current–voltage (I-V) graph. Here, incorporating flexible 2D rGO improves the surface area available for interaction, enhances electron mobility, and Ag NP speeds up the process, additionally providing better sensing performance [[35], [40]]. In other words, the high catalytic activity of Ag and the large conductance of rGO enhance the sensing performance (synergetic reaction). As a proof of concept, the fabricated PFET-based sensor was tested for quantifying glucose in artificial urine samples and energy drinks (Gluconate-D).
2. Experimental Section:
2.1. Synthesis of Ag-rGO
At first, we synthesised Ag-rGO nanocomposite by a simple microwave-assisted technique reported previously by our group [41]. The formation of Ag-rGO nanocomposites was initially confirmed by UV–visible spectroscopy (UV-1800 Shimadzu UV spectrophotometer (Japan)), shown in Figure S1 (a). As explained previously, all the other morphological analysis is done by material characterisation techniques [[41], [42]]. The synthesised Ag-rGO was dissolved in dimethylformamide (DMF), followed by sonication to prepare the semiconducting coating ink.
2.2. Fabrication of PFET
The fabrication of PFET with an Ag-rGO channel layer on a paper substrate brings the concept of miniaturised electronic device making. The schematic diagram of the paper-based FET and the fabricated device is shown in Fig. 1 (a). Fig. 1(b) shows hydrophobic and hydrophilic regions on chromatography (Whatman CHR grade 4, GE Healthcare UK) paper substrate through a simple photolithography process. (The fabrication procedure is explained in the supporting information) [43]. The fabricated channel has a width, W, of 0.25 mm and length, L, of 0.5 mm, and was drop coated with as-synthesised Ag-rGO ink. Patterning of pre-synthesised Ag-rGO nanocomposite reduces the roughness of the filter paper and significantly alters the physicochemical, electrical, and electronic properties.

Download: Download high-res image (105KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 1. (a) Schematic illustration of PFET, (b) Digital image of the (1) Printed plastic mask used for photolithography, (2) Image showing obtained hydrophobic and hydrophilic region on a paper substrate after photolithography process, and (3) Fabricated PFET device.

In contrast to sophisticated multiple layering techniques, the drop coating of carbon-based nanocomposite on filter paper is straightforward, user-friendly, and provides mechanical strength to the device. Having cellulose filter paper dielectric layer, S, D, and G contacts are made of commercially available Ag paste (Sigma Aldrich). The applied Ag is cost-effective when compared to other noble metals such as gold (Au), cadmium (Cd), and platinum (Pt) [44]. Besides being highly conductive as fabricated, PFET was dried at a 60 °C to remove the extra moisture content.
2.3. Device characterisation
The field-emission scanning electron microscopy (FE-SEM) images and energy dispersive X-ray (EDX) spectra were taken with Carl Zeiss Sigma Field Emission Scanning Electron Microscope from Oxford instruments (Germany) for characterising fabricated PFET. The surface morphology differences confirm Ag paste (Fig. 2(d)) for the three ohmic contact terminals and the presence of Ag-rGO nanocomposite as channels (Fig. 2(c)). The cross-sectional view demonstrates the uniform Ag ink-coated layer on the paper substrate (Fig. 2(e)). Further, the presence of carbon, oxygen, and silver in the nanocomposite, as well as the Ag ink in the contact terminals, was revealed by analysis (EDX) (Figure S1 (b) and (c)). The electrical parameters were measured using a semiconductor parameter analyser (Keithly 4200 SCS) and an LCR meter.

Download: Download high-res image (333KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 2. (a) Schematic diagram showing PFET circuit arrangement to measure the current value (b) PFET device connected to Keithly 4200, (c) and (d) FE-SEM images confirming the Ag-rGO and Ag ink coating respectively, (e) The cross-sectional image of Ag ink (top) coated on a paper substrate (bottom), and (f) The PFET output characteristics plotted for different gate voltages.

3. Results and discussion
3.1. Electrical characterisation
To understand the device's operation and performance, fabricated PFET was tested at room temperature by applying external potentials. Electrical and electronic measurements were carried out with the experimental set-up, as shown in Fig. 2(a) and 2(b). In general, a higher drain voltage than the source voltage helps to enhance the collection and movement of charge carriers [12]. The highly conducting Ag ink for the three contact electrodes reduces the serial resistance and produces electrons in bulk [45]. Spiking 2 µL of 0.1 M phosphate buffer solution (PBS) on the dielectric area made of cellulose filter paper acts as an electrolyte and reaches the semiconducting channel through the wicking effect, commonly observed for paper devices. Under an external bias voltage, the electrolyte interacts with the Ag-rGO nanocomposite in the channel layer, producing an outward drain current.
It can be observed from Fig. 2(f) that in the case of a positive drain to source voltage (Vds) sweep adding 0.1 M PBS, the drain to source current (Ids) value shows an increment to some extent, and later, it attains almost saturation. We could observe a similar pattern with a comparatively higher current magnitude by varying gate-to-source voltage (Vgs) values in steps (Vgs = -1V, 0 V, 1 V, 4 V, and 5 V, respectively). For negative Vds sweep, the output characteristics show a reverse phenomenon [42]. Further transfer characteristics plotted by fixing Vds = 1.5 V, having Vgs sweep results in only a slight increment in Ids value as shown in Fig. 3(a). The drain current increment for varying positive Vgs in the transfer characteristics indicates the N-type operation. The reverse phenomenon occurs at the negative Vgs sweep, confirming the P-type operation. Without glucose, minimal charge carriers contributed to Ids flow (Fig. 3(a)). The output and transfer characteristics are plotted to confirm the ambipolar nature of the PFET, typical for graphene-based FETs [[46], [47]]. Ag-rGO are well known for their bioapplications [42]. The lower work function, as well as the distribution of porous Ag NP on flaky rGO surfaces, are found favourable for the catalytic oxidation–reduction of glucose with better electron/hole transfer [48].

Download: Download high-res image (159KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 3. (a) Transfer characteristics showing Ids increment for different glucose concentrations with Vds = 1.5 V. (b) & (c) Considering transfer characteristics of 0.5 mM glucose with the slope taken for both positive and negative gate voltage sweep to calculate trans conductance (Gm) values.

The charged species (electrons and holes) generated due to the redox process in the presence of glucose will develop EDL near the channel interfaces. As explained in the introduction section, the EDL formation process is due to the ion movement. This makes PFET less sensitive to the roughness of the paper, and dielectrics help to develop capacitance. Charge transfer during the reaction changes capacitance and hence effective channel voltage proportional to the glucose concentration resulting in modified Ids value [22]. The transfer characteristic curve's minimum conductance (Dirac point) was ≈ 1.3 V. The shift of the Dirac point from zero towards the positive voltage is attributed to imperfections in the cellulose substrate structure and p-doping (protons) [31]. The linear conductance in positive and negative bias voltage is due to electron and hole movements [49]. The supplementary information shows the transfer and output characteristics plotted for three different PFET devices tested over three different days along with gate leakage current (Igs) values for both in presence and absence of glucose (Figure S2.(b), (c) and (d)). We can observe that the gate leakage current produced was much lesser than the Ids value.
The slope of the transfer characteristic at the linear region gives the transconductance value (Gm) for both positive and negative Vgs, as represented in Fig. 3(a) for different concentrations of glucose. We could obtain field-effect mobility by solving equation (1) by substituting the measured value of CI and other known parameters at constant Vds.
(1)
Here, W/L is the width-to-length ratio, and μf is the field mobility, represented as μe or μh. For the designed PFET with a W/L ratio of 0.25 and applied potential Vds of 1.5 V, the measured capacitance using the LCR meter was ≈ 1.56 nF. Finding the slope of the linear region in the transfer characteristics (Fig. 3(b) and 3(c)) and solving the trans conductance gives μe and μh of ∼ 9116 cm2V-1S-1 and ∼ 8823 cm2V-1S-1. The target analyte influences resultant electron/hole mobility and external drain current. We could observe comparatively large carrier mobility in our experiment, better than simple graphene-based FETs. Which improves the switching speed, sensitivity, and current conductance [[31], [50], [51]]. The logarithmic graph of the transfer characteristics is shown in Figure S3. The measured ION/IOFF value is 1.66 × 102 and SS of 6.29 V/decade. Without glucose, the value of µe and µh was calculated to be ∼ 3641 cm2V-1S-1 and ∼ 2436 cm2V-1S-1, respectively, with a measured capacitance ≈ of 2.1 nF. Further, the calculated ION/IOFF was 1.06 × 102, with an SS of 7.8 V/decade obtained. These parameters decide the power dissipation as well as the switching speed of the sensing device, respectively. A large value of µf, ION/IOFF, a small value of SS, and nearly zero VT are essential to guarantee fast switching. Here, the working of fabricated PFET is comparable to existing conventional organic field-effect transistors. Values extracted from our measurements depict fast response, low power dissipation due to large electron/hole mobility and hence better sensitivity [[12], [22], [52], [53], [54]].
3.2. PFET for glucose sensing
Fig. 3(a) depicts the device characteristic curve after adding 0.5 mM glucose followed by 3 mM. As observed in the transfer characteristics, Ids increment was proportional to glucose concentrations at negatively or positively biased gate voltages suggesting an effect of an increasing number of charged particles similar to solution-gated FETs [[55], [56]]. Transfer characteristics depict a gradual increment in the Ids with the glucose concentration above VT. We could observe notable linear current change between gate voltages 1 V to 4 V. Further readings are taken by fixing the external potential values Vgs = 3 V [30]. The device operates in saturation for V ds≫ Vgs-VT. The previous report says that channel resistance and Ids values are controlled by varying Vgs independent of Vds value in this region [[57], [58]]. In the near saturation region, sensitivity for the target analyte is higher, and a more significant Ids value is noticed for fixed Vgs. Hence, in our sensing application, we selected Vds = 5 V. Further, the Ids versus glucose concentration calibration plot was drawn, taking the average value of experiments carried out in triplicates.
Fig. 4 (a) shows that tested PFET exhibit a linear range from 0.1 mM to 5 mM glucose concentration, having a high correlation coefficient, R2 = 0.99, and the calculated LOD was 3 µM. For the specificity test, a 0.2 mM glucose solution was added along with various interfering biomolecules. For the interference study, we used 1 mM lactic acid (LA), 1 mM urea, 1 mM sodium chloride (NaCl), 10 µM of uric acid (UA), and 10 µM of ascorbic acid (AA). The other sugar is taken as 0.2 mM of sucrose (SUCR), 0.2 mM lactose (LACT), 0.2 mm maltose (MALT), and 0.2 mM fructose (FRUCT), respectively. Fig. 4(b) shows that the current response to 0.2 mM glucose was more significant than other interfering biomolecules. Other sugars showed a slight increase in the Ids value at 0.2 mM concentration compared to the same amount of glucose concentration. Specifically, 0.2 mM fructose added to the sensing strip resulted in 30 % more drain current than 0.2 mM glucose alone. It should be noted that the detection of glucose levels with diabetic urine samples won’t have significant interference from urinary fructose, as reported by Kawasaki et al. [60], because the actual concentration of other sugars in urine is deficient compared to the glucose concentration we have taken [[35], [39], [60]]. Notably, for diabetic patients, the fructose concentration in urine was 127.8 µmol/day, compared to the 164.4 mmol/day of urinary glucose [60]. Hence, even though there is an interference effect, the proposed sensor could be of interesting.

Download: Download high-res image (295KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 4. (a) Linear calibration plot for glucose concentration from 0.1 mM to 5 mM with LOD of 3 µM. (b) The bar graph shows the interference study for 0.2 mM glucose followed by adding 1 mM each of LA, urea, NaCl and 10 µM each of UA, AA and 0.2 mM of other sugars.

In other words, glucose increases the Ids value considerably. Adding interfering biomolecules (LA, NaCl, UA, AA, and urea) with different concentrations did not produce a noticeable change in the Ids value [[39], [61], [62], [63]]. However, other sugars, mainly fructose, show slight interference. So, we consider improving the specificity for other sugars as the future scope of the work. In the Ag-rGO surface, reactive hydroxide species play a significant role in the interaction of glucose with FET. The pH effect also makes it resistant to common interfering species [35].
The successful completion of the interference test demonstrate the suitability of the as-developed PFET for non-enzymatic glucose sensing. We envisage, further improvements in sensitivity and selectivity could be achieved through the addition of bimetallic nanocomposites.
3.3. Analytical performance of PFET for glucose sensing
A fabricated non-enzymatic PFET sensor was used for glucose estimation with an artificial urine sample to ascertain the analytical application. The PFET-based sensor's feasibility for clinical studies was verified by measuring glucose concentrations in lab-prepared synthetic urine [[37], [59], [62]]. As demonstrated in Table 1, subsequent investigations showed good recovery values for different glucose concentrations in spiked artificial urine. This test again confirms the suitability of devised PFET as a non-enzymatic glucose sensor to quantify different glucose concentrations.
Table 1. Recovery studies for PFET in artificial urine and energy drink samples with spiked glucose.

Sl. No	Synthetic urine (mM)	Recovered
(mM)	Recovery (%)	Energy drink (mM)	Recovered
(mM)	Recovery (%)
1	0.1	0.10	100	1	1.02	102.2
2	0.3	0.28	93.3	1.3	1.29	99.2
3	0.7
0.67	95.7	1.6	1.55	96.8
4	0.9	0.93	103.2	1.9	1.94	102.1
Glucose concentration estimation in a commercially available glucose energy drink (Gluconate-D) was performed for real-time sample analysis. The sample was tested using the standard analytical recovery method (successive addition) [[40], [41]]. At first, known concentration of the energy drink (1 mM) was spiked on the sensing area, followed by 0.3 mM, 0.6 mM, and 0.9 mM of standard glucose concentrations, and the current value was noted each time with the help of an existing metre while keeping the Vgs = 3 V and Vds = 5 V fixed. A linear regression graph was plotted to perform recovery analysis. The results show acceptable reclamations of about 100 ± 3 % for known glucose concentrations, as shown in Table 1.
Fabricating biosensors on a renewable resource such as a chromatography filter paper substrate incorporating bio-friendly ink gives the concept of a sustainable electronic device and circular economy [[9], [63]]. Even if earlier reports explain the development of PFET devices on varieties of paper substrates. Our method consumes the least energy, cheaper, is biocompatible and employs simple procedures without any sophisticated techniques [[6], [64], [65]]. It can be used for multiple applications and paves the tactic for mass production in future miniaturised electronic device making. In future, we can obtain enhanced device performances by modifying PFET channels with various nanocomposites and could utilise for different sensing applications.
4. Conclusions
Fabrication, as well as the applicability of low-voltage PFET, was successfully demonstrated. A simple and cheaper fabrication technique at room temperature utilises chromatography paper as a substrate and a dielectric material. We accomplished a performance analysis by extracting the parameters from the electrical characterisation. The resultant device exhibited ambipolar nature with significant reproducible parameters. Electrical and electronic parameters extracted point towards high electron/hole mobility. Calculated ION/IOFF of 1.66 × 102, SS of 6.99 V/Dec, and VT ≈ 1.3 V indicate that the obtained parameters are comparable with silicon- or plastic-based materials. Overall, we developed a sustainable electronic chip utilising cellulose and verified it further for non-enzymatic glucose sensing. Ag-rGO nanocomposite as a channel layer results in high electron transfer for glucose sensing with improved sensitivity. The practical applicability of the fabricated PFET sensor for glucose detection is demonstrated in commercial energy drinks and artificial urine samples. Thus, we believe that the developed low-cost, user-friendly, disposable PFET chip with significant performance will help to establish future POC wearable diagnostic devices by integrating with the internet-of-things (IoT) platform.
Author Statement
Herein, we have fabricated cellulose paper-based field effect transistors (PFET) in a simple yet cost effective method by giving more importance to green electronics aspects. The fabrication method involves simple photolithography techniques for establishing the channels and drop casting method for making the source (S) and drain (D) electrodes and then gate (G), further decorated with Ag-rGO nanocomposite for the channels. Having cellulose as a dielectric as well as an active channel layer for depositing nanocomposite materials and electrodes made of silver (Ag) ink, the as-fabricated PFET brings the concept of green electronics. The fabricated device exhibited excellent electrical and electronic characteristics with high electron and hole mobility. Further, the sensing application was demonstrated by evaluating the glucose detection in a non-enzymatic fashion with a linear range from 0.1 mM to 5 mM with a low limit of detection (LOD) of 3 µM in physiological pH. We further showed the practical applicability of the fabricated low voltage PFET based biosensors by measuring glucose content in commercially available energy drinks as well as in artificial urine with satisfactory results.
Supporting Information

Non-enzymatic Glucose Detection Using Nanocomposite Decorated Cellulose-Based Field Effect Transistor - a Green Electronics Approach
Kodiadka Ayshathil Bushraa, Kariate Sudhakara Prasada,b*
a Nanomaterial Research Laboratory (NMRL), Nano division, Yenepoya Research Centre, Yenepoya University, Deralakatte, Mangalore 575018, India.
b Centre for Nutrition Studies, Yenepoya (Deemed to be University), Deralakatte, Mangalore 575 018, India.

Spectral and surface characterization of silver decorated reduced graphene oxide (Ag-rGO) nanocomposite and Ag contact support on the PFET

The UV-absorption spectra provide initial confirmation about Ag-rGO formation. The absorption peak at 401 nm is ascribed to Ag-rGO nanocomposite formation. The absence of a peak at 230 nm and the presence of a broader shoulder at  ~260 nm, meant for the characteristic * orbital transition for rGO, defines the reduction of GO to rGO (Figure S1. (a)). The energy dispersive x-ray analysis (EDX) spectra are shown in Figure S1. (b) and S1. (c) taken for both Ag-rGO nanocomposite and Ag contact supports the presence of corresponding surface elements.1

 Figure S1. (a) UV- visible absorption spectra, (b) and (c) EDX spectra confirming the presence of surface elements for Ag-rGO and Ag ink, respectively.

Fabrication and Testing Procedure of PFET

The photolithography process involves producing the barrier layer, applying the photoresist, soft baking, aligning the mask, and developing the pattern on the substrate layer. 2,3,4 We used liquid, polymeric, and biodegradable photoresists (SU8) on the cellulose paper substrate (CH4). Initial baking at 90°C and subsequent exposure to ultra violate (UV) radiation under the mask, followed by post-baking, results in image printing on the paper substrate. This process changes the photoresist's chemical composition, increasing its developer solubility. The developer solution creates the hydrophilic and hydrophobic zone on the paper substrate by removing the exposed resist and leaving windows of the bare layer underlying substance, as depicted in Figure 1(b). Further heating at 60 °C eliminates the substrate's water content. To fabricate PFET, Ag-rGO was drop coated on the channel area of length (L) and width (W), followed by making Ag contacts for the source (S), drain (D), and gate (G) connections. The hydrophilic area between the gate and the channel is a dielectric layer. Finally, the device was baked at 60 °C again. For testing the feasibility of the glucose sensing, 3 µL of 0.1 M PBS, followed by the glucose sample, was pipetted on the dielectric area as shown in the schematic diagram (Figure S2. (a)). The added glucose solution flows through the hydrophilic region, reaches the channel, and interacts with the nanocomposite where the redox reaction occurs. The redox process forms an electronic double layer (EDL) near the junctions, resulting in the drain to source current (Ids).













Figure S2. (a) Schematic diagram along with the fabricated device representing the glucose sample testing, (b) Transfer characteristics showing Ids-Vgs along with the Igs change for three different devices, (c) Output characteristics showing Ids -Vgs for three PFETS (d) The average value of (Ids-Vgs) along with Igs after adding 0.5 mM of glucose sample 

The 0.1 M PBS produces only a lesser current due to fewer generated charge carriers. Figures S2. (b) and S2. (c) show the fabricated device's transfer and output characteristics and the measured gate leakage current (Igs). Here, Ig1, Ig2, and Ig3 are the measured gate current for the three different PFET devices measured on different days, and Ids1, Ids2, and Ids3 are the corresponding drain currents. As depicted in Figure S2. (b), the resulting gate leakage current is less when compared to the Ids current value. Further, Figure S2. (d) shows the measured Ids value and leakage current after adding 0.5 mM glucose solution. Here, we plotted the average current value of three devices. We can observe a significant increment in the Ids value, and the leakage current value is comparatively lower. Hence, the gate leakage current is much lesser than the observed Ids value in both the presence and absence of glucose.5,6

Finding subthreshold swing value and current ON/OFF ratio

The current ON/OFF ratio (ION/IOFF) and subthreshold swing (SS) were calculated from the device transfer characteristic by plotting the graph on a logarithmic scale. ION/IOFF is the ratio of the maximum ON state current to the minimum current below which the device turns OFF. The resultant value describes the ability of the device to switch from the ON state to the OFF state. The SS value depicts the rate at which Ids vary with Vgs sweep voltage change in a decade, measured by fitting the curve at the steeper portion of the subthreshold region as shown in Figure S3. with a fixed value of Vds=1.5V, the inverse of the obtained slope gives the SS value.7,8 

                                                 
	







Figure S3. Logarithmic graph plotted for transfer characteristics and slope taken at subthreshold region ( line extended to zero and the portion of the curve intersects with the line drawn gives the subthreshold slope)

Reference 
(1)  Priya Swetha, PD; Sudhakara Prasad, K. A Non-Enzymatic Disposable Electrochemical Sensor for Pyruvic Acid. Electroanalysis 2020, 32, 2237–2243. 
 (2)  Nalamasu O, Cheng M, Timko AG, Pol V, Reichmanis E, Thompson LF. An overview of resist processing for deep- UV lithography. J Photopolym Sci Technol. 1991, 4, 4299-318.
 (3)  Sonia, J.; Zanhal, G. K. M.; Prasad, K. S. Low Cost Paper Electrodes and the Role of Oxygen Functionalities and Edge-. Microchem. J. 2020, 158, 105164.
(4) Sapna, K.; Sonia, J.; Shim, Y.B.; Arun, A.B.; Prasad, K.S. Au nanoparticle-based disposable electrochemical sensor for detection of leptospirosis in clinical samples. ACS Appl. Nano. Mater. 2022, 5 (9), 12454.
(5)  Bhatt K, Kumar S, Tripathi CC. High-performance ultra-low leakage current graphene-based screen-printed field-effect transistor on paper substrate. Pramana. 2020, 94, 1-4.
(6)  Svetlova A, Kireev D, Beltramo G, Mayer D, Offenhäusser A. Origins of leakage currents on electrolyte-gated graphene field-effect transistors. ACS Appl. Electron. Mater. 2021, 3, 5355-64.
(7)  Boukhili, W.; Mahdouani, M.; Erouel, M.; Puigdollers, J.; Bourguiga, R. Reversibility of Humidity Effects in Pentacene Based Organic Thin-Film Transistor: Experimental Data and Electrical Modeling. Synth. Met. 2015, 199, 303–309.
(8) 	Zhang, X. Device Engineering of Organic Field-Effect Transistors toward Complementary Circuits; Georgia Institute of Technology, 2009.

