A novel approach towards molecular memory device in gate tunable structure of MoS2-graphene Rahul Tripathi and Abha Misra () Department of Instrumentation and Applied Physics, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, Karnataka 560012, India © Tsinghua University Press and Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany, part of Springer Nature 2020 Received: 10 June 2020 / Revised: 3 August 2020 / Accepted: 20 August 2020 ABSTRACT Molecular interaction in two-dimensional (2D) van der Waals (vdW) interfaces has drawn tremendous attention for extraordinary materials characteristics. So far sensing characteristics of molecular interaction has been exploited extensively to reach the detection limit to a few parts-per-billion (ppb) of molecules and far less attention is given to the evolution of persistent current state due to the molecular exposure. Our study focuses on molecular memory operation of MoS2-graphene heterostructure based field effect transistor. Metastable resistance state of the device due to the external perturbation of molecules is tuned to get a nearly relaxation free current state at much lower molecular concentration of 10 ppb to facilitate non-volatile memory features for molecular memory operation. An ultrafast switching operation in milli-second order is achieved at room temperature for the fastest recovery obtained so far in any molecular sensor. The process is co-controlled both by molecular as well as external charge density. KEYWORDS MoS2, graphene, field effect transistor, molecular memory, trap charges 1 Introduction The past few decades have seen a tremendous growth in memory devices which constitutes the basis of modern electronic information. However, both the magnetic and electrically controlled programable charge storage device operations are not popular due to the physical and technical limitations [1–4]. Several reports have shown gate charge trap memory- based operation for multibit charge storage [5, 6]. Recently optoelectronic storage devices have grown a significant interest not only due to their non-volatile charge storage capacity but also allow the manipulation of light activated logic gates by light-matter interaction [7–10]. These achievements greatly promote the development of low-dimensional hybrid systems in the field of molecular memory device. Other than uses of light in optoelectronic based memory systems, the molecular stimulus represents another powerful input for molecular activated logic gates, recording, computing, programmable logic circuits at room temperature [11−13]. Alternatively, molecular memory has the potential to work in molecular scale and therefore promises for low power memory devices which can be tailored by the molecular interaction. So far molecular interactions are limited predominantly on emphasizing sensor response, sensitivity and the detection limit of molecular sensors [14–21] However, far less attention is given to the fact that most of the sensors lack fast recovery due to a permanent shift in base resistance of the material upon molecular exposure leading to a persistent current state [22–24]. This slowly relaxing state is observed in case of carbon-based materials, semiconductors and heterojunctions which are the materials to be potentially utilized as a programable charge storage devices [25–27]. Gas-phase detection involving atomically thin transition- metal dichalcogenides channels, especially molybdenum disulfide (MoS2), is extremely sensitive to the surrounding atmosphere because of their high surface to volume ratio, thus allowing their exploration in chemical and biological molecular sensing applications [14–16, 28–30]. Moreover, MoS2 field effect transistor (FET)-based gas sensor has been widely studied because of field-dependent nature of its electronic states offering gate controlled optimal sensitivity [31–34]. However, MoS2 alone is not promising for high-performance sensing applications because of its relatively heavier electronic mass and low carrier mobility [35, 36]. High carrier mobility essentially contributes to a higher carrier injection efficiency, which is beneficial for the high sensitivity. Therefore, ongoing development in graphene electronics is combined with other two-dimensional (2D) layered materials for outstanding carrier mobility in ambient condition along with the gate tunability that provides an excellent platform for numerous applications. A lateral heterostructure in combination with the high mobility of graphene and the extremely sensitive MoS2 is an ideal candidate for the molecular sensing approach. Charge-trapping characteristic of MoS2 and graphene in multi-stacked devices, fabricated from 2D heterostructure materials are mostly exploited for photo-intrigued memory devices [37–39]. This study investigates the persistent current state after molecular interaction, observed due to the slow recovery process, in detail for the molecular memory operation that has not been realized so far in any study. It is demonstrated that the external electric field is not limited to tuning Schottky barrier height at an interface by external electric fields [17, 22, 40–42], but can   Research Article Address correspondence to abha.misra1@gmail.com 178 also be exploited to tune a slowly relaxing metastable resistance state, originated by external perturbation of molecules created by slow electrodesorption process. In this work, the electronic states in molecular memory device of MoS2-graphene heterostructure are tuned by the short pulses of back-gate voltage (VBG) and a nearly relaxation-free current state at much lower molecular concentration leads towards a non-volatile memory features for the molecular memory operation. The device shows an ultrasensitive detection limit up to 10 parts per billion (ppb) level. The heterostructure demonstrated a ~1,000% increment in molecular response (ΔIM) at 15 V back gate bias. A short –VBG pulse is used to recover the current to its original state which is the RESET for the memory operation. This unique study enables a potential route towards the molecular memory for a programmable charge storage devices. 2 Results and discussion Heterostructured devices of MoS2 and graphene were obtained by mechanical exfoliation from bulk crystal using the scotch tape method. The graphene was exfoliated directly on a 300 nm SiO2/Si wafer, followed by a transfer of exfoliated MoS2 using the transfer technique (see method section for the details). A typical device architecture is shown in Fig. 1(a). The electrical contact pads were fabricated using e-beam lithography followed by the metal deposition of Cr/Au (10 nm/40 nm). Figure 1(b) presents an optical image of the MoS2/graphene based heterostructure device where graphene channel was formed between the contacts #1 and #3 and an MoS2 channel between contacts #2 and #4. The dotted line shows the area of graphene and MoS2 channels. Electrical measurements between crossed Nano Res. 2021, 14(1): 177–184 contacts #1 and #2 or #3 and #4 were performed for the heterojunction-based characterizations (see Fig. S1(a) in the Electronic Supplementary Material (ESM) for a detailed measurement procedure). The device geometry allows to conduct electrical characterizations on both the heterostructure as well as individual 2D channels of MoS2 and graphene. Long channel regime operational characteristics are more likely to be observed due to the long channel length of the devices which are in the range of 8−10 μm. The presence of graphene and MoS2 is confirmed by Raman spectra measurements (Fig. 1(b)), performed on the heterojunction using a confocal Raman microscope. The Raman spectra of MoS2 clearly depicts the presence of E12g peak at 385 cm−1 and A1g peak at 408 cm−1 and the presence of graphene was confirmed from D peak at 1,351 cm−1, G peak at 1,580 cm−1 and 2D peak at 2,700 cm−1. Due to the high intensity Raman spectra peaks of the MoS2  as compared to graphene peaks, high-resolution scans were performed to confirm the presence of graphene. Electrical characterizations were performed in a controlled environment on both heterojunction and individual channels of MoS2 and graphene as was depicted in Figs. 1(a) and 1(b). Rectifying behavior of source-drain current (ISD) as a function of source-drain voltage (VSD) is clearly observed, which is well-modulated by the back-gate voltage as shown in Fig. 1(c). The variation of ISD with VBG is depicted in Fig. 1(d) where a weaker dependence on back gate voltage is observed with the –VSD. Both rectifying and less dependence of drain current on the back-gate voltage can be explained by the Schottky barrier formation at MoS2-metal and MoS2-graphene junctions (for details see Fig. S1(b) in the ESM). Temperature dependent measurement of the drain current evaluates the Schottky barrier Figure 1 (a) Schematic and electrical measurement details of MoS2-graphene heterostructure device. (b) Optical microscopic image of the device. Raman spectra are shown below. (c) Drain current, ISD vs. drain voltage, VSD plot at different gate voltages. (d) Drain current, ISD vs. back gate voltage, VBG at different source-drain bias. (e) Drain current, ISD vs. back gate voltage, VBG at different temperatures. (f) Schematic of energy band diagram for positive gate bias at both +VSD and –VSD.  | www.editorialmanager.com/nare/default.asp Nano Res. 2021, 14(1): 177–184 height as depicted in Fig. 1(e). The calculated Schottky barrier height is approximately 0.17 eV (Fig. S1(b) in the ESM).   The effect of barrier has also been illustrated schematically in Fig. 1(f) and in Fig. S1(b) in the ESM for both positive and negative back-gate voltages (+VBG and –VBG), respectively. For +VBG, the movement of Fermi level in graphene reduces the effective barrier height leading to an increase in the current with positive drain bias (+VSD). On the other hand, for –VSD, the metal-MoS2 barrier height dominates and leads to a weaker dependence on VBG (Fig. S2(a) in the ESM). The reduced drain current at –VSD (in Fig. 1(d)) has been illustrated schematically in Fig. 1(f) for +VBG, where the band bending is shown upon tuning the barrier at different gate voltages as like the earlier reports [12, 14, 43]. The variation in barrier height can be tuned using the back voltage as shown in Fig. S2(b) in the ESM. Furthermore, MoS2 channel shows a well-defined transfer characteristic curve, which is shown in Fig. S3(a) in the ESM. Interestingly the n-type behavior with a threshold voltage of –10 V is observed without the diode like characteristic which can be seen in Fig. S3(b) in the ESM. The linear characteristic illustrates an Ohmic contact formation in MoS2 channel (Fig. S3(c) in the ESM). Furthermore, the characterization of only graphene channel showed a “bell shaped” nature as a function of back-gate voltage where the Dirac point is observed near +8 V ensuring a hole doped nature of the channel (Fig. S4(a) in the ESM). Therefore, the individual channels of graphene and MoS2 in heterostructured device, retain their independent properties. Molecular interaction-based transport properties of the MoS2-graphene heterostructured device is investigated in a controlled environment. The device was exposed with nitrogen di-oxide (NO2) gas molecules at a fixed concentration of   100 ppb (parts-per-billion). Figure 2(a) presents the variation of ISD with source-drain bias at a fixed VBG before and after 179 molecular exposure. A decrease in the current is observed    at +VSD with molecular exposure and the difference increases at higher source-drain bias. On the other hand, at –VSD, the current is increasing after molecular exposure that could be due to the modulation in the barrier height at MoS2-graphene junction caused by the molecular induced increase in the work function of the graphene at the junction [43]. Variation in the drain current with VBG is depicted in Fig. 2(b) where the change in ISD is observed to be more with +VBG as explained later. Although, graphene was the bottom layer, the molecular interaction shows a significant change in its resistance and charge neutrality point shifts towards positive gate voltage due to molecular doping as depicted in Figs. S4(b) and S4(c) in the ESM. Furthermore, the dynamic response and stability of the device is evaluated both at lower and higher concentrations in  a range from 10 ppb to 1ppm (parts-per-million). The sensor  responses ç ç I N I Δ 100(%) æ ö ÷ ´ ÷ ÷ ç è ø , w here, ΔI is the change in  2 magnitude of the current after gas exposure, I N 2 is the current measured under N2 flow before NO2 exposure) from 10 to 100 ppb is shown in Fig. 2(c), where the recovery is slow and eventually becomes almost zero leading to a persistent current state of the device. A better recovery is observed at higher concentration, near 1 ppm in Fig. 2(d). It is known that the irreversible nature of chemical sensor at room temperature is attributed to the lower thermal energy than the activation energy for the desorption thus, leading to a long recovery time (more details in Fig. S5 in the ESM) [44, 45]. Ultraviolet (UV) illumination and heating at elevated temperature are the common methods to recover the sensor responses [17, 18]. However, it is not convenient to integrate a micro-heater or UV source with a chemical sensor due to degradation of material, Figure 2 (a) Drain current, ISD variation with different source-drain biases, VSD upon molecular exposure. (b) Drain current, ISD versus gate voltage, VBG for MoS2-graphene heterostructure in presence and absence of gas molecules, respectively. (c) Electrical response to switching on-off of gas exposure for the MoS2-graphene heterostructure at 10–100 ppb molecular concentration. Inset depicts the sensor response at lower concentration (up to 100 ppb) and (d) electrical response at higher molecular concentration (up to 1 ppm) and inset is the sensor response with the molecular concentration. www.theNanoResearch.com∣www.Springer.com/journal/12274 | Nano Research 180 generation of large number of electron-hole pairs, low recombination rate and suffers from relatively longer recovery time. The amplitude of sensor response, as a function of molecular concentration are plotted in the inset of Figs. 2(c) and 2(d) where a linear dependence is observed for both lower (100 ppb level) and higher concentrations (1 ppm level). The persistent current state which was observed due to the slow recovery process after molecular interaction is investigated in more detail for the molecular memory operation. The device was exposed with 100 ppb of molecular concentration with a duration of 100 s and then left for a longer time to recover back to its initial state. After switching on the molecular interaction, the resistance of the channel sharply increases to its ON state with a finite value which can be seen in Fig. 3(a). Even after switching off the molecular flow, the current stays in its ON state and does not return to the base value within the measurement duration. The origin of physical effect of persistent current is the trapped charge carriers at localized traps at the interface which is created by the molecular exposure. Switching off this persistent state with the application of pulsed gate voltage is used for a programmable memory device. Application of –ve gate pulse releases the trap charges (as explained later in  Fig. 5(a)) and resetting the device resistance into its original state, which can be seen in Fig. 3(a). A basic switching operation is presented in Fig. 3(a) where the molecular interaction is called as SET and gate pulse (–30 V, VBG) is termed as RESET for a fixed VBG of +20 V throughout the experiment. However, at –VBG there is no change observed in the cyan color trace line, which shows almost no relaxation of persistent current for different gate voltages. Figure 3(b) depicts the relaxation free current after very low concentration of molecular exposure in different panels of +VBG. Furthermore, a non- distinguishable fluctuation is observed within a small range of variation at different VBG. Switching amplitude was further controlled by changing the molecular concentration (molecular pulse). The effect of concentration on switching behavior is presented in Fig. 4(a). The gate voltage is set at +20 V throughout the experiment. Now it is well established that the SET and RESET operations can be performed using both the molecular interaction and the gate pulse. The top panel depicts the switching of both molecular and gate pulses. A systematic increase in the device response upon increasing molecular concentration is shown Nano Res. 2021, 14(1): 177–184 in Fig. 4(a). Presence of persistent state as observed earlier, is RESET by a pulsed gate voltage. Consequently, the switching behavior is more prominent with higher molecular concentration and less time of molecular exposure. Interestingly the molecular response of the device shows an electric field dependency which is further evaluated in detail. A systematic evaluation of switching action at different back gate voltages is illustrated in Fig. 4(b). Significant negative molecular response (ΔIM) is observed in the presence of molecular pulses (shaded region), where ΔIM is estimated by subtracting the ISD obtained after and before molecular interaction. The response appears negative due to the electron accepting nature of the molecules that decreases the channel conductivity. The final saturation value of ΔIM is extremely sensitive to VBG. There is a change of 1,039%, 724% and 474% for VBG of 15, 10 and 5 V, respectively at a fixed concentration of 100 ppb. Multiple cycles are illustrating the stability of the device operating at different gate voltages. The sensor response was analyzed after applying the gate pulse with each concentration. The ratio of base values for each cycle of 1 ppm molecular concentration is found out to be 0.93%, 1.27% and 1.83% respectively which is much lower than the sensor response (54%). The transient relative sensor response was analyzed to get insight into the sensor response time at different concentration of NO2 molecules at room temperature, as shown in Fig. 4(c). The response time of gas sensor, defined as the time required for the molecular response to reach from 10 to 90% of its maximum value in the gas environment is measured as ~ 272.9 s towards an exposure of 100 ppb gas in the MoS2-graphene device (Fig. S5 in the ESM). The recovery time of a few milli- second (~ 5 ms) was measured with the gate pulse. This ultrafast recovery time at room temperature is unusually faster compared with any previously published reports on MoS2 gas sensors as provided in the Table S1 in the ESM [14–21]. Furthermore, an excellent recovery of the sensor was achieved at room temperature without any external stimuli. The change in carrier density in the channel is related to  the sensor response at a fixed gate voltage after molecular exposure. Sensor response (S) is related to the change in carrier concentration in the channel that can be expressed as  S GAS 0 n n t n t- ´ ´ Δ = = , where GAS n and 0 n are the  n n 0 0 channel carrier concentrations in the presence of gas molecules Figure 3 (a) SET and RESET operations with molecular interaction and gate pulse for controllable memory operation. Below cyan trace is shown to choose a proper operational voltage for memory operation. (b) Relaxation free persistent current at different gate voltages.  | www.editorialmanager.com/nare/default.asp Nano Res. 2021, 14(1): 177–184 181 Figure 4 (a) Effect of molecular concentration on switching behavior of the device. (b) Electric field-controlled switching behavior of MoS2-graphene device. (c) Sensor response to show recovery time with gate pulse. (d) Carrier density (volume) modulation with increasing molecular concentration which varies linearly with molecular concentration. (e) Carrier density variation compared with molecular response at different gate voltage. and without gas, respectively, and t is the thickness of the flake  C and BG n V ( ) 0 BG t e = ´ , where BG C is the geometrical capacitance  and e is the charge of an electron. The variation in Δn is depicted in Figure 4(d) with the molecular concentration which is linear as like the reported 2D material [46]. Molecular doping concentration for 100 ppb of gas concentration is found to be 2 10 11 a N »´ cm−1 (for details see Fig. S6 in the ESM). The molecular response, ΔIM is observed linearly varying with the increasing +VBG gate bias and thus, can be related with a degenerate model of 2D-semiconductor as depicted in Fig. 4(e). The capacitance, CBG in an FET is the total capacitance of quantum capacitance (Cq) and oxide capacitance (Cox) connected in series, CBG is dominated by the smaller capacitance. Thus, carrier concertation in the channel is dependent only on the back gate voltage when Cq>>Cox. On other hand, when the Fermi level is deep inside the conductance band or valance  band, the quantum capacitance Cq saturates and approaches the  degenerate limit 2 C C e g  = [47]. At high gate voltages,  q sat 2D when the FET is “strongly ON” the channel carrier density is high, which is approximately  ON 1/ ( / n eCC C C V V = +- ox sat ox sat )( BG CR ) VCR is the critical gate voltage that differentiates between ON and OFF states of the FET. Figure 4(e) shows a comparison between the generation of carrier density and ΔIM as a function of gate voltage upon a molecular exposure of 100 ppb. Therefore, the increasing carrier concentration in the channel upon short pulse of VBG plays a crucial role in molecular response. The mechanism of molecular memory can be understood using electron theory of chemisorption which is shown schematically in Fig. 5. The electron accepting nature of the NO2 molecules creates an imaginary Debye layer formation at the surface and induces holes in the channel (Fig. 5(a)). A net change in the gate voltage depletes the channel and reduces the number of electrons in the vacant sites and thus, lowers the chemisorption rate. The high adsorption energy of NO2 molecule indicates a strong binding energy of 240 meV with MoS2 layer which is much higher than the thermal energy (25 meV) at room temperature [14, 48]. After applying a –ve gate pulse voltage, the holes migrate at the surface leading to the discharge of molecules from the surface. Furthermore, the trap charges at the interface are also released by the –ve gate pulse, which can recombine with the holes and thus, leads to a sudden recovery in the drain current [49, 50]. Figure 5(b) presents the time evolution of carrier density with the molecules and gate pulse. At t = 0, with positive VBG, the channel is enriched with the electrons and a molecular pulse at t = tm ON leads to a change in the current which is explainable by the change in the hole density in the charge density plot as shown in Fig. 5(b). At t = tm OFF after switching off the molecular pulse, the current shows a persistent current state due to the trap holes and chemisorption of the molecules. The application of a –ve pulse voltage manipulates the weakly associated chemisorption sites with appreciable dipole moment by stretching the bonds between adatoms and adsorption sites [40–42]. Therefore, at  t = tG OFF all these factors help the desorption process and the current returns to its base position. www.theNanoResearch.com∣www.Springer.com/journal/12274 | Nano Research 182 Nano Res. 2021, 14(1): 177–184 Figure 5 (a) Mechanism of charge transfer process and electric field induced desorption of gas molecules using gate voltage. (b) Evolution of carrier dynamics with time after molecular pulse and gate pulse. (c) Time evolution of molecular response with the application of molecular pulse and gate pulse. The molecular pulse and VBG pulse switch on at tm ON and tG ON, respectively, as a function of time. 3 Conclusion A molecular memory operation was achieved in MoS2-graphene heterostructure for an ultrasensitive molecular interaction leading to a molecular memory device. Induced molecular interaction in MoS2-graphene channel shows persistent current state which can be co-controlled using a gate voltage pulse and interacting molecular density. The molecular sensitivity of the device shows an extremely large value (~ sensor response, 1,000%) with a detection limit (experimentally) of 10 ppb at room temperature. Electrostatic pulsed field-controlled response of the device is observed with MoS2-graphene heterostructure with a thin bottom graphene layer. The nature of the persistent current state is observed to be relaxation free and suitable for molecular memory operation. A pulsed gate voltage leads  to an ultrafast recovery time of 5 ms at room temperature suitable for various practical applications of the device. Owing to large sensitivity, these studies support the fact MoS2-graphene can be a promising candidate for molecular memory operation in molecular activated logic gates, recording, computing, and programmable logic circuits. 4 Materials and methods 4.1 Device fabrication Heterostructure of MoS2 and graphene was fabricated with two different processes for a maximum molecular interaction. For the first process, a two step lithography process was done on a clean Si/SiO2 wafer without any flake to ensure the flatness and proper transfer of the flakes. In the first step, the contact electrode was fabricated followed by deposition process of Cr/Au (5 nm/10 nm). A 2nd layer of lithography process was done  to form the contact pads with a deposition of Cr/Au (10 nm/  70 nm). A standard procedure of dry transfer technique was used to transfer the flake using polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) stamp without any polymer sacrificial layer to ensure the good surface quality. A piece of glass was covered with a PDMS stamp (0.2–0.4 mm thick) which is transparent and can be used under the microscope. Few layers of graphene (HQ Graphene) were then exfoliated directly on the stamp and prepared for transfer between the electrodes. The chosen graphene flake was then carefully transferred between the source-drain (S-D) electrode. Now, few layers of the MoS2 flake (Manchester Nanomaterial) was exfoliated onto the PDMS stamp and placed on the micromanipulator stage upside down and aligned perpendicularly with the graphene flake using the microscope. The two were brought into contact and MoS2 flake was transferred in a crossed position on top of graphene. In the second process, the flakes were transferred using the standard dry transfer technique and a standard lithography process was done followed by a deposition process. 4.2 Electrical and gas sensing measurements Raman spectroscopy was performed in ambient condition, at a wavelength of 532 nm and with a light spot of 1 micron at different places of the device on MoS2, graphene and MoS2- graphene heterostructure. The electrical characterization of the devices was carried out with Agilent B1500A semiconductor analyzer in a closed chamber under a nitrogen environment after a stabilization process. Pulse dependent measurement was done by writing a script program for the back-gate voltage measurement port. Temperature dependent measurement was done in a high-vacuum chamber, using Agilent B1500A semiconductor analyzer with a ramp of 25 °C. All the gas sensing experiments were performed at room temperature and atmospheric pressure. To achieve desirable concentration before being injected into the chamber the nitrogen dioxide gas was mixed with ultra-pure nitrogen gas. To control the concentration, and the total flow rate of gas flow, mass flow controllers were used and a total flow rate of 1,000 standard cubic centimeters per minute was maintained throughout the experiment.  Electronic Supplementary Material A novel approach towards molecular memory device in gate tunable structure of MoS2-graphene Rahul Tripathi and Abha Misra () Department of Instrumentation and Applied Physics, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, Karnataka 560012, India Supporting information to https://doi.org/10.1007/s12274-020-3063-7 Ⅰ Measurement Details of Heterostructure Figure S1 (a) Schematic of the MoS2-grpahene heterostructure with detailed descrption of the measurement scheme along MoS2, graphene and MoS2-graphene channel. (b) Schematic of band structure at neagtive back gate voltage. The electrical and moecular sensing measurements of all the devices are done for all the channels. A detail analysis is shown in the schematic of Fig. S1(a). Contacts #1 and #3 are the MoS2 channel and #2 and #4 are the garphene channel. The measurement between MoS2 graphene channel was done either between #1 and #4/#2 or #2 and #2/#4. The graphne contact was always in the grounded condtion to ensure a uniform measurement condition. Fig. S1(b) shows the band structure for −VBG at different source-drain bias.  Π Electrical Characteristics of MoS2-graphene Heterostructure  Figure S2 (a) Logarithmic I-V plot for MoS2-graphene channel. (b) Barrier height calculation for MoS2-graphene heterostructure.   Address correspondence to abha.misra1@gmail.com 2 Nano Res.  The logarithmic I-V plot for MoS2-graphene channel for +VSD and -VSD is shown in Fig. S2(a). The channel shows a n-type behavior with threshold voltage of -16 V, VBG. The modulus of ISD for negative VSD is also plotted which is found to be very small in the order of 10-11 A. The variation in barrier height can be tuned using the back voltage. Slope of the barrier is measured to be around 0.17 eV, which is shown in Fig. S2(b). The barrier height is more prominent at negative back gate voltage as compared to the positive one. Ⅲ Electrical Characteristics of MoS2 Channel Figure S3 (a) Variation in ISD with gate voltage at different VSD. (b) Logarithmic plot of ISD with VBG at different VSD. (c) Variation in ISD with VSD at different VBG. The electrical characteristic of only MoS2 channel is depicted in Fig. S3. The variation in ISD with gate voltage is depicted in   Fig. S3(a). Fig. S3(b) depicted a logarithmic plot of ISD for positive VSD with VBG. The threshold voltage for only MoS2 channel is observed to be 10 V, VBG. The variation with VSD in ISD is plotted at different VBG which is depicted in Figure S3(c). The variation in ISD is observed to be well modulated by VBG with negative source-drain bias in contrast with the MoS2-graphene heterostructure that showed a diode like characteristic.  Ⅳ Electrical and Molecular Interaction in Graphene Channel Figure S4 (a) Resistance versus gate voltage plot for graphene channel. (b) Resistance versus gate voltage plot for lower concentration of molecules. (c) Resistance versus gate voltage plot for higher concentration of molecules.   | www.editorialmanager.com/nare/default.asp Nano Res.  3 The variation in drain current was measured for graphene channel with gate voltage and depicted in terms of resistance in   Fig. S4(a). The graphene was placed at the bottom of MoS2 layer so most of the surface of graphene flake was covered by MoS2. Graphene channel was well modulated by gate voltage and typical bell-shape of resistance was observed with charge neutrality point (CNP) at +8 V, VBG. Although the flake was at the bottom, the molecular interaction shows a significant change in resistance and shift in CNP towards positive gate voltage due to molecular doping. Interestingly, the shift in resistance was moving down (reduction in resistance) to left side of CNP (n-type doping) and going up (increase in resistance) to right side of CNP (p-type doping) as depicted in Fig. S4(b). The downward shift of the resistance is due to the impurity induced scattering centers. The change is more prominent with higher concentration and the shift of CNP is almost 27 V of ΔVBG as shown in Fig. S4(c) for 10 ppm of molecular concentration.  Ⅴ Molecular Interaction and Recovery Process in MoS2-graphene Channel The recovery process after molecular exposure was observed in case of higher molecular concentration. A partial recovery is observed when the device was exposed with 1ppm molecular concentration which is shown in Fig. S5(a). The recovery process shows a decay curve which is not explainable with a single decay scale. The participation of two kinds of adsorption sites in decay process can be expressed by a non-linear fit with two rate constants given by the following equation: () St S a*exp = +- +- [ ] kt b kt *exp[ ] 0 1 2 Here S(t) is time dependent sensor response, S0, a, b, k1 and k2 are fitting parameters. The rate constants k1 and k2 describe the transition rate of electrons from two localized adsorption states to conduction band.1 The response time of the device is measured to be 272 s which is shown in Fig. S5(b). A cyclic data was taken for a single concentration of 1 ppm gas molecules at fixed back gate voltage of +20V which is shown in Fig. S5(c). A gate pulse was given to set back the molecular response at its base position even after three cycles of molecular exposure which is found out to be an extraordinary in case of 2D materials. A persistent state was observed in lower concentration of gas molecules where a gate pulse was given after each cycle and set back to base position as shown in Fig. S5(d). Figure S5 (a) Two steps desorption process in case of higher molecular concentration. (b) Response time measurement of the device. (c) Cyclic behavior of the device at a fixed concentration of 1 ppm and coming back to its base position even after 3 cycles with a gate pulse. (d) Almost no recovery in case of lower molecular concentration (100 ppb) and recovered to its base position with gate pulse. Ⅵ Modulation of Charge Carrier Density due to Molecular Interaction in MoS2-graphene Channel The commonly used expressions for extracting the carrier density from the transfer characteristics of 2D semiconductor field effect  transistor (FET) can be written as C BG n V V =-, where BG e BG ( ) T C is the geometrical capacitance and e is the charge of electron.  This expression is only valid for very limiting conditions. A generalized form in case of semiconductor (n-type) carrier density  ¥ can be written as =ò n g E f E d ( ) ( ) E , where ( ) 1/{1 [exp( f E E E k )/ ]} = +- known as Fermi-Dirac function and  F B T E C www.theNanoResearch.com∣www.Springer.com/journal/12274 | Nano Research  Nano Res.   | www.editorialmanager.com/nare/default.asp 4 ( ) * 2 /2 s v g E ggm πћ = . Here, EF is the Fermi level of the system, kB Boltzmann constant, T is the absolute temperature, ћ is the  reduced Planck constant and gs and gv are spin and valley degeneracy, respectively. So, the electron density in a 2D semiconductor channel can be written as, 2 * [1 [exp( )/ ] e D B F C B n g kTln E E kT = +- where, 3 1 * 2 2 2 3 2 2 ( ) ( ) (2 ) s v B D gg m kT g πћ = , as a result, the DOS is high, with the carrier statistics stays effectively nondegenerate at room  temperature over a very wide range of density of interest (1011 ~ 1013 cm−2), with the Fermi level hardly entering the bands. For few layers MoS2, FETs with 300 nm SiO2 gate oxide has VCR  0.65 V. With the correct carrier statistics, we can extract the carrier concentration in the channel during ON state and compare with the experimental data from the device characteristics in Fig. S6(a). If a channel is doped with external acceptor type (p-type) impurities due to the molecular exposure, VT shifts toward positive gate values depending on the impurity density and the gate barrier thickness. Therefore, the gate voltage term, VBG can be replaced by  VBG+VTH-VCR. So, the equation for acceptor ions in the channel can be expressed as ( ) ( ) 1 1 1 Δ / a ox sat T CR N C C V V e---= + + .  Figure S6 (a) Carrier density variation with gate voltage in the channel and compared with molecular response at different gate voltage. (b) Threshold voltage shift due to molecular exposure. (c) Carrier density (volume) modulation with increasing molecular concentration which varies linearly with molecular concentration. Fig. S6(b) depicts the threshold voltage, VT shifts from VT1=-19 V before gas exposure to VT2=-17 V, or ΔVT=2.0 V, VBG in 100 ppb molecular concentration. The VT shifts towards right, with increasing gas induced doping concentration, which is measured to be 11 2 10 a N»´ cm-1, which agrees with the experimental finding. The amount of change in carrier density in the channel is related to the sensor response after the molecular exposure. Sensor response is defined as 0 0 / GAS S σ σ σ =-, where GAS σ and 0 σ are the channel conductance in the presence of gas molecules and without gas, respectively. Since σ neμ = , therefore 0 0 0 Δ GAS n n t n t S n n- ´ ´ = = Where t is the thickness of the flake. The variation in Δn is depicted in Fig. S6(c) with molecular concentration which is linear as reported earlier in case of 2D material.3 Table S1 Comparison between literature on MoS2 based gas sensor and the present work. Material Analytes concentration  Working condition Recovery time Reference MoS2 100 ppm NO2 RT (UV light) 29 s 13 MoS2 1.5 ppm NO RT  unrecoverable 11 MoS2-graphene 500 ppb NO2 200º C < 60 s 14 MoS2 100 ppm NO2 RT 600 s 9 MoS2 20 ppb NO2 RT 43200 s 10 MoS2-graphene 100 ppm NO2 150º C >600 s 12 3D MoS2 aerogel 500 ppb NO2 200º C 107 s 15 vertical MoS2 100 ppm NO2 RT unrecoverable 16 MoS2 50 ppm NO2 100º C >600 s 17 MoS2 50 ppm NO2 RT unrecoverable 17 MoS2-graphene 10 ppb NO2 RT (gate pulse) 5 ms this work Nano Res.  Reference 5 [1] Zhang, Y.; Kolmakov, A., Chretien, S.; Metiu, H. and Moskovits, M. Control of catalytic reactions at the surface of a metal oxide nanowire by manipulating electron density inside it. Nano Letters, 2004, 4, 403-407. [2] Ma, N. and Jena, D. Carrier statistics and quantum capacitance effects on mobility extraction in two-dimensional crystal semiconductor field-effect transistors. 2D Materials, 2015, 2, 015003. [3] Schedin, F.; Geim, A.K.; Morozov, S.V.; Hill, E.W.; Blake, P.; Katsnelson, M.I. and Novoselov, K.S. Detection of individual gas molecules adsorbed on graphene. Nature materials, 2007, 6, 652-655. [4] Su, Y.; Han, H.L.; Cai, Q.; Wu, Q.; Xie, M.; Chen, D.; Geng, B.; Zhang, Y.; Wang, F.; Shen, Y.R. and Tian, C. Polymer adsorption on graphite and CVD graphene surfaces studied by surface-specific vibrational spectroscopy. Nano letters, 2015, 15, 6501-6505. 