Highly Sensitive Tungsten Oxide Thin Film-Based Field-Effect Transistor for Real-Time Monitoring of Dissolved Ammonia in Human Plasma
Sumit Sharma, Akshay Moudgil, Sanjay Singh, Samaresh Das, Prashant Mishra
First published: 31 May 2022 https://doi.org/10.1002/admi.202200647Citations: 4
Find It at UChicago
SectionsPDFTools Share
Abstract
Field-effect transistors (FETs) based on metal-oxide thin film have the advantage of excellent sensitivity, fast response, miniaturized size, and compatibility with bio-analytes. In this work, a highly responsive FET biosensor is fabricated based on tungsten trioxide (WO3) thin film to detect the physiological concentration of total ammonia (ammonium NH4+ and NH3) in human body fluids. The elevated level of ammonia in the body fluids indicates damage or improper functioning of organs mainly the liver. Thus, real-time monitoring of ammonia concentration in human body fluid acts as a prognostic marker for liver disorders. The fabricated FET device shows reliable and accurate results for ammonia sensing with the highest response of 498 at 100 µM and a limit of detection of 6 µM. This device measures the ammonia in body fluid faster than available techniques and shows a high response towards ammonia in commercially available human plasma. This is also capable of real-time detection of very low concentrations of ammonia (2 µM) with a wide range from 2 to 100 µM. Also, the prospect of the device's batch fabrication is demonstrated with consistent and high stability performance. This study demonstrates a unique and stable sensing platform, capable of direct detection of ammonia concentration in human plasma for point of care applications.

1 Introduction
Rapid and accurate measurement of elevated ammonia in human blood is crucial for the diagnosis of several diseases, i.e., hepatic encephalopathy, hyperammonemia, Ray syndrome, and urea cycle disorder.[1] The liver plays the most critical role in ammonia homeostasis by removing ammonia from the circulation that is produced by the urea cycle and protein metabolism. Hence, the elevated level of ammonia concentration observed in the patient's blood is an indicator of improper liver function. Over time, excess ammonia in blood can lead to liver scarring or cirrhosis. Liver cirrhosis is an advanced-stage liver disease due to excessive alcohol consumption, viral hepatitis B, viral hepatitis C, metabolic syndrome, and non-alcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH).[2] Severity of liver cirrhosis has been monitored by the level of ammonia in human blood or plasma,[3, 4] The excess concentration of ammonia in the venous blood of healthy adults and children potentially acts as a toxin, especially for central nervous system functioning,[5, 6] The normal level of ammonia in healthy people's venous blood is ≈30 µM.[7] Even the mild increase in ammonia concentration from the normal level causes mood swings or memory loss.[8] The rapid increase in blood ammonia from the normal level may cause permanent brain damage or even death.[9] Therefore, early, frequent, or online monitoring of blood or plasma ammonia levels in such disorders is imperative.

The early-stage chronic liver disorders are diagnosed by liver biopsy, blood test, and monitoring ammonia concentration in plasma or blood. Liver biopsy is considered the gold standard for detecting chronic liver disorders. Other techniques are spectroscopy-based techniques, ion-sensitive electrode, and electrochemical sensors[10, 11] that rely on the detection of ammonia in blood/plasma. The liver biopsy is difficult to perform frequently because it's painful and sometimes assesses the risk of progression. The spectroscopy-based techniques are costly, time-consuming, and require a trained operator with a laboratory-based complex setup. In some cases, it takes several hours to a whole day to prepare the sample and measurements, which eventually delays the diagnosis process, potentially give rise to error due to varying/increment of ammonia level in the sample,[12-15] These laboratory assays require 1–3 mL of blood sample every time, which is not feasible for frequent testing and continuous monitoring.[16] The majority of previous reports for the detection of plasma ammonia or ammonia in whole blood are based on the ion-selective electrode, but several milliliter sample volume requirements and slow response (10–15 min) made this process unsuitable for frequent and real-time sensing capability,[1, 16] An indophenol reaction has been reported that utilizes the separation of ammonia by ion exchange process and detected it by modified indophenol reaction by the colorimetric readout, but the ion exchange process is slow (required time >20 min) and the chemical used have limited shelf life.[17] Thus, the ideal alternative is a sensor with ease of portability and a small sample volume requirement. Recently, gas-phase ammonia detection in blood with a small sample volume requirement and real-time detection has been reported where alkalization, that changes NH4+ to NH3 is required.[7] However, the alkalization process is likely to result in false-positive data as NH3 gets released due to alkaline hydrolysis of proteins, especially hemoglobin, and labile amides like glutamine.[1]

Efforts have also been made to develop a non-invasive breath-based ammonia sensor for the diagnosis of diseases related to liver failure and urea cycle disorder,[18-21] However, the ammonia concentration in exhaled breath has been weakly correlated with the concentration of ammonium ions in human body fluid.[22] Thus, breath tests for blood ammonia detection are not clinically relevant in the gas phase.[23] In addition, it is challenging to get efficient stability and accuracy in the gas phase ammonia biosensor; hence it is required to develop a sensor that can emulate accurate detection capability in both liquid and gas phases.[24] The ammonia present in human body fluid is in the form of ammonium ions (NH4+), usually formed from ammonia gas or vice versa under the equilibrium condition: NH3 (gas) + H+ ⇌ NH4+. In the physiological condition (pH 7.3–7.6 of body fluid), 95–99% ammonia is present in the form of NH4+ which is responsible for diseases such as fibrosis, cirrhosis, and hyperammonemia.[1] The detection of ammonia in plasma samples is quite accurate and reliable as it can be stored for as long as up to 3 weeks at −20 °C.[11] Hence, there is an urgent requirement for developing a biosensor for Point-of-care (POC) applications with a capability of ammonia detection in plasma in the form of NH4+/NH3 and real-time monitoring capabilities with minimal blood sample requirement. The advantage of POCs based diagnosis system is that the patient can use them at home or bedside monitoring in the hospitals and no trained manpower is required.[25] Field-Effect Transistors (FETs) have been an attractive choice for chemical analyte detection due to their high sensitivity, real-time sensing capability, fast response, and scalability for large-area fabrication,[26, 27] By employing the standard CMOS compatible fabrication process, FET device has the advantage of batch fabrication and ease of integration with readout circuits for lab-on-chip biosensing applications,[28, 29] In FETs, the analyte interaction at the device channel surface occurs, which is connected between the source and drain terminal. This interaction of analyte on the channel surface gives rise to the transfer of charges and ultimately produces the change in the device output current,[30, 31] Typically, materials like graphene, carbon nanotube, and, metal oxides are used for the channel layer,[32-35] Among the metal oxide nanostructures, molybdenum oxide (MoO3), tin oxide (SnO2), indium oxide (In2O3), vanadium oxide (V2O5), zinc oxide (ZnO), and tungsten oxide (WO3) have been used as the sensing layer for the detection of NH3 gas.[36] Amongst these nanomaterials, WO3, which is an n-type semiconductor has been considered to be the most promising material for ammonia sensing due to its valance state-changing capability upon oxidation/reduction.[37] However, no report is available to date for the detection of NH4+/NH3 in the form of dissolved ammonia in blood or blood plasma by a FET-based biosensor.

In this work, we present a tungsten oxide (WO3) thin film-based field-effect transistor to detect NH4+/NH3 in human plasma. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first attempt to develop a miniaturized biosensor for the detection of ammonia in blood plasma. The sensing range of the fabricated sensor can be used as a prognosis tool to monitor dissolved ammonia concentration in plasma. The proposed device has real-time sensing capability with the highest response even at a very low concentration (2 µM) and can lead to the development of a point-of-care device for the detection of ammonia in human blood plasma.

2 Results and Discussion
2.1 Fabrication and Structural Characterization of WO3 Thin Film FET
A FET biosensor was fabricated on an Si/SiO2 wafer (2-inch) using WO3 thin film as a channel layer. Figure 1a shows a schematic of the FET device in the back gate configuration. In this work, devices were fabricated on a 2 inch silicon wafer. The array of large area fabricated devices is shown in Figure 1b and a field-emission scanning electron microscope (FESEM) image of the fabricated device is shown in Figure S1 (Supporting Information). To obtain channel-specific analyte interaction, device passivation was done using SU-8 polymer. Figure 1c shows SU-8 well opening at channel region while rest of the area is passivated. The Energy Dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX) of WO3 FET shows the composition of different channel surface elements, in Figure S2 (Supporting Information). The channel length and width were 5 µm and 10 µm, respectively, as shown in inset Figure 1c.

Details are in the caption following the image
Figure 1
Open in figure viewer
PowerPoint
a) Schematic of back gated WO3 thin film FET. b) Optical image of batch fabricated devices. c) Optical image of single device (inset: zoomed view of channel region). “S” is the Source, and “D” is the Drain electrode.
Figure 2a shows the Raman spectra of WO3 thin film in the range of 200–1000 cm–1, where four vibrational bands were observed at 271, 326, 712, and 806 cm–1. The highly intense Raman peak at 806 and 713 cm–1 represents OWO stretching vibration, whereas the low-intensity peak at 326 cm–1 corresponds to WO stretching of deformation mode. Another peek at 271 cm–1 represents the bonding of the OWO bending vibration mode. All peaks are in good agreement and confirm the formation of nanostructural WO3.[38]

Details are in the caption following the image
Figure 2
Open in figure viewer
PowerPoint
Material characterization: a) Raman Spectroscopy of WO3 thin film (at 532 nm wavelength), b) XRD pattern of WO3 thin film, c) FTIR spectra WO3, d) 2D AFM image of WO3 thin film.
The X-ray diffraction pattern of as-deposited WO3 thin film on the Si/SiO2 substrate is shown in Figure 2b. The diffraction peaks observed at 23.1°, 28.6°, 34°, 42°, 47.3°, and 50.7° correspond to (002), (200), (202), (300), (020), and (220) planes (JCPDS card no. 96-101-0619), which confirms the polycrystalline film formation of WO3. The sharp and intense peak of the XRD pattern represents the excellent crystallinity of as-deposited WO3 film. Figure 2c illustrates the FTIR spectra of WO3 in the range of 500 to 4000 cm–1. The FTIR peaks at 770 and 970 cm–1 correspond to OW and WO stretching modes, respectively.[39]

The relatively weak band at 1150 cm–1, which is assigned to the plane deformation (bending) WOH mode was found. The 2D AFM image of WO3 thin film is shown in Figure 2d, which shows the smooth film surface with an average roughness of 2.67 nm.

2.2 Electrical Characterization of WO3-FET
The electrical properties of fabricated WO3 back-gated FET were characterized using Keithley SCS 4200A and lakeshore probe station under ambient conditions. The device showed typical n-type output characteristics (IDS–VDS) and transfer characteristics (IDS–VGS), shown in Figure 3. The output characteristics measurements were performed by sweeping the source to drain voltage (VDS) from 0 to 2 V and applying fixed gate bias from 0 to 10 V, with the increment of 2 V, as shown in Figure 3a. For the transfer characteristics, back-gate to source voltage VGS was swept from −25 to 10 V with an applied drain bias of 0.5 to 2 V in the step of 0.5 V, as shown in Figure 3b. The transfer characteristics of the device exhibit an on/off ratio of the order of ≈3. To ensure repeatability of the fabricated device, output characteristics of 10 FET from the same substrate are shown in Figure 3c, demonstrating excellent electrical output characteristics behavior of the device with a very small device to device current variation (≈5%). These measurements were performed in sweeping drain mode at a fixed gate bias of 2 V, and all FETs from the same batch exhibited excellent performance.

Details are in the caption following the image
Figure 3
Open in figure viewer
PowerPoint
Electrical characterization of fabricated FET device: a) Output characteristics of WO3 FET, b) Transfer characteristics of WO3 FET, c) Output characteristics of 10 devices at different locations of wafer.
2.3 Real-Time Detection and Response of Ammonia in Plasma
One of the critical aspects of any biosensor is real-time detection capability. To evaluate the performance of this device, real-time sensing of ammonia in human plasma was carried out. The device was tested for different concentrations of ammonia in human plasma from 2 to 100 µM. The measurements were started with the pristine device at VDS = 2 V and VGS = 5 V, followed by functionalization of bare plasma (without ammonia) on the WO3 channel, and no significant change was observed in the device current. After that, ammonia in human plasma was introduced at the FETs channel surface, in the volume of 2 µL starting from 2 to 100 µM. In real-time monitoring, the change in drain current was observed as the primary parameter at fixed VDS and VGS. The real-time ammonia measurement in plasma is shown in Figure 4a, where the drain current increased with an increase in the target analyte concentration. The device showed a swift response time of 9.05 s even at a very low concentration of 2 µM. This real-time detection of the current change in ammonia concentration signifies the FET device's real-time plasma ammonia monitoring capability.

Details are in the caption following the image
Figure 4
Open in figure viewer
PowerPoint
a) Real-time measurement of plasma ammonia (Inset: Response time of device). b) Device response for different concentrations of plasma ammonia (n = 3, Data are presented as mean value ± standard deviation). c) Transfer characteristics of the device for different concentration of ammonia in plasma (n = 3) (Inset: Transfer characteristics for plasma and plasma with dissolved ammonia (10 µM)). d) Output characteristics of 10 devices at 70 µM ammonia in plasma. e) Schematic band diagram representation of WO3 thin film FET.
Response at different concentrations of plasma ammonia determines the sensing capability of the fabricated biosensing device. The response is generally used to benchmark the sensitivity of biosensors and is defined by
 
 
(1)
where I and IO are the drain-source current of FET biosensors with and without ammonia interaction, respectively. Here, we investigated the response of the WO3 FET-based biosensor for various concentrations of plasma ammonia in the range of 2 to 100 µM. Figure 4b shows the response curve with the ammonia concentration, and the response is linearly fitted with a correlation coefficient R2 = 0.99506. The response is calculated by first measuring the device current with bare plasma and termed as the IO, then measured the device output current with the interaction of plasma ammonia at different concentrations termed as I. Notably, the device current at every concentration was measured at least three times to confirm the stability and repeatability of results. The response increased from 65 (at 2 µM) to 498 (at 100 µM) with the increase in ammonia concentrations, demonstrating the biosensor's wide range detection capability.
The most significant merit of a biosensor is the limit of detection (LOD), which estimates the lowest detectable analyte quantity with reliable results. This FET device exhibits a very low LOD of 6 µM, calculated by the equation; y+3σ, where y is the intercept of the linear fitting curve of response and σ is the standard deviation.[40] This device shows very promising capability even at a very low (<2 µM) level of ammonia concentration, which can be further targeted. The transfer characteristics of the WO3 FET sensor at different concentrations of plasma ammonia are shown in Figure 4c. The drain current of the WO3 FET biosensor increases with increasing ammonia concentration in plasma, indicating charge transfer between the WO3 semiconducting surface and ammonium ions in the plasma. A possible explanation could be, that the dissolved ammonia in plasma ionizes to form NH4+and OH−. Finally, the migration of NH4+ and OH− in the WO3 channel layer leads to a significant current increase. It can be seen that the drain current of the FET device increases with the interaction of ammonia solution due to the positive charges of the ionic liquid that acts as a supporting electrolyte. The increased concentration of ammonia solution in plasma enhanced the electron transfer in the electrochemical reaction. The output characteristics of sensors with different ammonia concentrations are shown in Figure S3 (Supporting Information), which shows the increase in device output current with increasing ammonia concentration.

Poor uniformity among the fabricated device on the same substrate is one of the predominant issues which hinder state-of-art biosensor advancement. A higher uniformity among the devices was obtained through an optimized metal-oxide deposition and device fabrication process in this work. Electrical characterization of 10 devices was carried out at different wafer locations for the same ammonia concentration (70 µM) in plasma. Figure 4d shows the stability characteristics with a variation of ±2.5%.

A schematic of the conduction mechanism by band diagram representation is shown in Figure 4e to understand ammonia interaction with the channel surface. In pristine WO3, the flow of charge carriers between the source and drain region does not occur under no bias. However, with the increased gate bias voltage, band bending takes place, and charge carriers move from the source and drain terminal. When ammonia in plasma interacts at the channel surface, available free-electrons in ammonia (NH4++ OH–), get transferred from source to drain terminal, and a subsequent rise in drain current is observed.

Overall, the fabricated device can do real-time monitoring of ammonia in plasma with the highest response of 498 at 100 µM and shows the possibility of batch fabrication with significantly less variation in device response at different wafer locations. The comparison of the fabricated device with the available sensing device is shown in Table 1.

Table 1. Comparison of this study with previously reported biosensors for ammonia detection in plasma and whole blood
Material	Sensing technique/Sample type	LOD	Response time	Response (I–I0/I0)	Reference
Polyaniline nanostructure	Impedance (breath ammonia)	40 ppbV	<1 min	–	[18]
Reagents	Photo spectroscopy (whole blood)	25 µM	30 min	–	[17]
Polyaniline	EIS (human serum)	12 µM	–	1.197	[10]
–	Fuel cell (whole blood)	2 µM	45 s	–	[7]
WO3 thin film	FET (plasma)	6 µM	9.05 s	63.8	This work
2.4 Plasma Ammonia Verification Using Spectroscopy Technique (by Assay Kit)
An ammonia assay kit from Sigma Aldrich was used for the quantification of ammonia which is based on the enzymatic determination of ammonia in the sample using a simple enzymatic reaction as given:
 
 
(2)
The absorption spectra of NADPH at the ammonia assay kit for different concentrations of ammonia in plasma are shown in Figure 5a which shows decreases in absorption spectra with time. The result demonstrates that the kit can monitor at a range above 40 µM as shown in Figure 5a and hence not significant for measuring ammonia at a lower concentration. Although the detection range for ammonia using an ammonia assay kit is 15– 900 µM in a water sample,[41] the plasma spiked with ammonia solution was viscous due to which proper reaction occurs at a concentration of more than 40 µM of dissolved ammonia in plasma. Moreover, enzyme stability and reaction environment conditions also play a major factor in determining ammonia in sample apart from its expensiveness, tedious and time-consuming role. It is well known that the ammonia assay kit is a well-established laboratory technique for ammonia detection in plasma and blood, fabricated biosensor shows a response for a wide range of concentrations from 2 to 100 µM within a response time of 9.05 s. In the physiological condition (pH 7.3–7.6 of body fluid), 95–99% ammonia is present in the form of NH4+. To ensure the physiological condition of prepared ammonia sample in plasma pH measurement done by digital pH meter. Figure S4 (Supporting Information) represents the pH of the ammonia sample in plasma at different concentrations from 6 to 100 µM.
Details are in the caption following the image
Figure 5
Open in figure viewer
PowerPoint
a) Change in absorption spectra for ammonia assay kit for different plasma ammonia concentration 0–1 min (n = 3, Data are presented as mean value ± standard deviation) (Inset: Absorption spectra at different plasma ammonia concentration 1–5 min.). b) Correlation of the ammonia assay kit and FET biosensing responses of ammonia calibration standards. (n = 3, R-square = 0.9868). c) Real-time measurement of hydrogen sulfide and ammonia in plasma. d) Response of hydrogen sulfide and ammonia in plasma (each at n = 3, Data are presented as mean value ± standard deviation).
The performance of the fabricated FET biosensor device was tested in human plasma spiked with ammonia and compared to a standard laboratory spectrophotometric assay (Ammonia assay, Sigma). The prepared plasma samples spiked with ammonia were measured electrically using the fabricated FET biosensor and also spectroscopically with the ammonia assay kit @340 nm (by following the given standard procedure). The correlative relationship between the two methods using the calibration standards is shown in Figure 5b. A Pearson correlation coefficient (r) of 0.9868 was achieved between the device and the ammonia assay kit responses, demonstrating reliable agreement in the responses of both methods to ammonia levels in plasma. Calibration curves for both the device and the Ammonia assay kit also demonstrated comparable performance in the concentration range of 20 to 100 µM ammonia in plasma, Shown in Figures S5a and S5b (Supporting Information). Excellent linearity (R- square = 0.99503) was obtained for the response of the FET device and a slope of 4.185 was obtained. The Ammonia assay kit calibration curve for the same ammonia sample in plasma showed excellent linearity (R-square = 0.99589) with a slope of 0.012 was obtained. The standard ammonia assay kit can give a response only up to 15 µM, in water while in plasma it shows change in absorption from 40 µM concentration only. In contrast, the fabricated device shows a response up to 2µM with a limit of detection of 6 µM. The comparisons between the actual concentrations (calculated theoretically) of ammonia in the test samples and the values determined by the ammonia assay kit and fabricated FET biosensor are shown in Figure S5c (Supporting Information) by using the data shown in Figures S5a and b (Supporting Information). Both the tests are in good agreement with each other as shown in Figure 5b.

2.5 Sensor Selectivity to Ammonia
Electrochemical FET biosensors for measuring blood-borne analytes are typically susceptible to interference from other species in blood. The present device has the potential to be influenced by species that alter the conductivity of the channel region of the FET device. As in the current study, the targeted analyte was ammonia because of its association with liver disorder. The next most common analyte which relates to the human organ disorder is hydrogen sulfide (H2S). It is widely reported that H2S exists in blood and plasma in both physiological and pathological conditions.[42] Hence, H2S could be the most interfering analyte while the liver function test for ammonia detection in plasma is to be conducted. However, as measurements are made in the plasma spiked with ammonia, interfering species must also be in the plasma. The device's real-time sensing performance at 100 µM of H2S and ammonia is shown in Figure 5c, and the device shows three orders less current compared to ammonia. The device output and transfer characteristics for different concentrations of H2S in plasma are shown in Figure S6 (Supporting Information) where a very less increase in the drain current was observed with the interaction with the H2S. The sensor's response for ammonia and H2S at the different concentrations shown in Figure 5d depicts a significant response and selectivity toward the concentration of ammonia in plasma.

3 Conclusion
In this work, the WO3 thin film transistor for the detection of dissolved ammonia in plasma is demonstrated. The biosensing performance of the device was tested for ammonia in human plasma in the concentration range of 2 to 100 µM. The device shows an excellent response of 498 at 100 µM. This fabrication process offers the possibility of batch fabrication with high stability characteristics. The fabricated sensor shows the capability of real-time monitoring of ammonia in plasma with a response time of 9.05 s. The sample volume requirement for the fabricated device is only 2 µl which is very less compared to standard laboratory-based tests, which leads to the possibility of frequent and continuous monitoring of dissolved ammonia in plasma. The continuous and real-time monitoring of ammonia in human plasma works as a prognosis tool for liver disorders. The distinct feature of this biosensor is the capability of easy determination of raising the level of ammonia in plasma on a real-time basis with point of care monitoring, which makes this biosensor promising for an early indicator of liver disorder.

4 Experimental Section
Device Fabrication
The back gated field-effect transistor was fabricated on an Si/SiO2 wafer. The fabrication process comprises the thermal oxidation of a p-type (100) silicon wafer, followed by the standard RCA cleaning procedure of the 200 nm grown SiO2. Next, in the fabrication process, the channel region (5 µm length and 10 µm width) was patterned by optical lithography. After that, tungsten (15 nm) was deposited by radio frequency (RF) sputtering at a 10 mTorr working pressure, followed by a lift-off process. The tungsten trioxide (WO3) was synthesized from a metallic tungsten state by a chemical vapor deposition (CVD) process where tungsten was annealed at 500 °C for 30 min in the presence of 10 standard cubic centimeter per minute (sccm) oxygen. The source and drain contact region were patterned by optical lithography and the Cr/Au (15 nm/80 nm) deposition was done by RF sputtering. Finally, the device area passivation (other than the channel region) was performed using SU-8 2000 resist. The opening area for liquid sample interaction was kept at 20 µm x 10 µm.

Plasma Ammonia Sample Preparation
Commercially available human plasma (cat. no. P9523), ammonia assay kit (cat. no. AA0100), and sodium sulfide (Na2S) flakes (cat no. 27610-45-3) were procured from Sigma-Aldrich, Bangalore, India. A sample for ammonia in human plasma from 2 to 100 µM was prepared in-house by first dissolving plasma in MilliQ water, followed by mixing plasma and ammonium hydroxide in 10:1 by weight. Sample preparation for spectroscopic analysis was done by using the ammonia assay kit. Different molar concentrations of ammonia in plasma and MilliQ in the same volume were added to a polystyrene 96-well plate. The blank/control solution was made by using ammonia assay reagent and plasma/ DI water only. The standard solution was prepared by adding ammonia standard solution and ammonia assay reagent provided with the kit considered a gold standard technique.[11] The test was performed by enzymatic determination of ammonia in the plasma directly. The enzymatic reaction works on the principle of reaction between the alpha-ketoglutraic acid (KGA) and ammonia in the presence of glutamic acid dehydrogenase (GDH) to form glutamic acid by oxidation of nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADPH). Due to this reaction a decrease in absorption spectra at 340 nm due to NADPH's reduction, proportional to ammonia concentration in plasma was monitored. The reaction mixture was prepared appropriately, followed by the addition of L- glutamate dehydrogenase solution to each well, and then incubated the 96 well plate at 35 °C for 5 min. After that, the absorbance was continuously taken for 5 min with a time interval of 1 min at 340 nm using the spectrophotometer (Multiscan Sky, Thermo Scientific Fisher). Hydrogen sulfide, commonly found in blood plasma as an indicator of Alzheimer's disease and Down syndrome may act as an interfering agent for ammonia. Hence, characterization of this device was performed with H2S to show selectivity towards ammonia. The hydrogen sulfide (H2S) samples were prepared first in Milli Q and then in plasma as a stock solution by using sodium sulfide flake as a source described earlier.[43]

Characterization
The phase composition and crystalline structure of the WO3 thin film were characterized using X-ray diffraction (XRD) (Rigaku Ultima IV, Japan). The morphological analysis of the synthesized WO3 thin film was performed by AFM (Oxford instrument). The Raman (Renishaw micro-Raman, U.K.) spectra of samples were measured to confirm the formation of WO3. Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy (FTIR) (Nicolet iN10, Thermo Fisher Scientific, US) was used to analyze the chemical groups present on the WO3 thin film's surface. The electrical and sensing characterization of WO3 FET was done by using the Keithley 4200A SCS parameter analyzer and the Lakeshore probe station under ambient conditions.

Supporting Information
for Adv. Mater. Interfaces, DOI: 10.1002/admi.202200647
Highly Sensitive Tungsten Oxide Thin Film-Based FieldEffect Transistor for Real-Time Monitoring of Dissolved
Ammonia in Human Plasma
Sumit Sharma, Akshay Moudgil, Sanjay Singh,
Samaresh Das, and Prashant Mishra*
1
Supporting Information
Highly responsive WO3 thin-film based field-effect transistor for low concentration
ammonia detection in plasma for early diagnosis of liver disease
Sumit Sharmaa
, Akshay Moudgila
, Sanjay Singhb
, Samaresh Dasa* and Prashant Mishrab*
aCentre for Applied Research in Electronics, Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, Hauz Khas,
New Delhi-110016, India
bDepartment of Biochemical Engineering and Biotechnology, Indian Institute of Technology
Delhi, Hauz Khas, New Delhi-110016, India
*Corresponding author: pmishra@dbeb.iitd.ac.in, samareshdas@care.iitd.ac.in
Figure S1. FESEM image of WO3 thin Film FET
2
.
Figure S2. Energy Dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX) of fabricated WO3 FET
3
Figure S3. Output characteristics of WO3 thin film FET at different
ammonia concentration in plasma
Figure S4. pH of different ammonia concentration spiked in plasma (n=3)
[1]
4
References
[1] J. R. Huizenga, A. Tangerman, C. H. Gips, Ann. Clin. Biochem. 1994, 31, 529.
Figure S5. (a) Device Response for 20 to 100 µM concentration (n=3) (b) Ammonia assay kit
absorption spectra for20 to 100 µM concentration (n=3) (c) Variation in ammonia concentration
from theoretically calculated value for ammonia assay kit (Red color) and FET device (Black color)
Figure S6. Device characteristics at different concentration of H2S in plasma (a) Output characteristics (b)
Transfer characteristics
(b
)
(a)