Do Hun Kwak

Department of Organic and Nano System Engineering, Konkuk University, Seoul, 05029 Republic of Korea

Yena Seo

John E. Anthony

Center for Applied Energy Research, University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY, 40511 USA

Seunghyun Kim

Jiyeon Hur

Huijeong Chae

Hui Joon Park

Department of Organic and Nano Engineering, Hanyang University, Seoul, 04763 Republic of Korea

Bong-Gi Kim

Eunho Lee

Department of Mechanical and Energy Engineering, University of North Texas, Denton, TX, 76207 USA

Sunglim Ko

Department of Mechanical Engineering, Konkuk University, Seoul, 05029 Republic of Korea

Corresponding Author

Wi Hyoung Lee

Give access

Share full-text access

Use the link below to share a full-text version of this article with your friends and colleagues.Learn more.

Share a link

This paper systematically compares the gas sensing properties of organic field-effect transistors (OFETs) based on patterned 5,11-bis(triethylsilylethynyl)anthradithiophene (TES-ADT) films, by adopting TES-ADT crystal arrays of various shapes and dimensions. The patterning and crystallization of spin-cast TES-ADT layers are achieved by the use of a solvent-containing engraved polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) mold. Decreasing width of the TES-ADT pattern enhances gas sensing performance, as well as field-effect mobility of OFETs. The decreased grain boundary density at narrower line width contributes to the increase of field-effect mobility. On the other hand, the increased sensing performance is mainly due to the increased area of crystal edges, which provides a diffusion pathway for gas molecules to arrive at the semiconductor-dielectric interface. This study provides new perspectives on the diffusion pathway of gas molecules in OFET-based gas sensor, and will be useful for the design of active channel to boost the gas sensing properties of OFETs.

Organic field-effect transistors (OFETs) based on solution-processable organic semiconductors have been studied to enable low-cost, large-area, flexible electronics, due to their simple and inexpensive manufacturing process (i.e., ink-jet printing, spin casting, etc.), operable at room temperature.1-3The electrical characteristics of OFETs, such as field-effect mobility (µ), on–off current ratio (Ion/Ioff), and threshold voltage (VT), are influenced by complex factors relating to semiconductor, dielectric, semiconductor–dielectric interface, and source/drain contacts. In particular, the quality of organic semiconducting layer, such as the crystallinity, molecule orientation, grain size, and grain boundaries, affects its charge carrier transport properties.4-7Therefore, various attempts have been made to enhance OFET's performance through physicochemical control of the organic semiconducting layer.8-11

Among the solution-processable organic semiconductors reported so far, 5,11-bis(triethylsilylethynyl)anthradithiophene (TES-ADT) has been widely used, due to its excellent electrical characteristics.12The attachment of bulky silyl groups on both sides of the anthrathiothiophene backbone enables cofacial π–π stacking with a minimized intermolecular π–π stacking interval.13In general, conjugated molecules with bulky side substituents have tended to form poor crystalline films, when the films were prepared under fast solvent evaporation conditions, such as spin casting. Solvent vapor annealing is regarded as an effective method to form ordered film through reorganization of the molecules under a solvent vapor environment. For example, solvent vapor annealing of amorphous TES-ADT film led to a highly crystalline spherulite film with excellent charge carrier mobility.14,15In addition, simultaneous patterning and crystallization of TES-ADT film was enabled by using engraved polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) mold containing solvent.16,17Growth of the TES-ADT crystals in the confined PDMS block minimizes interspherulite boundaries, thereby reducing charge trapping for high charge carrier mobility.16,18-20

The current flow in OFETs depends on the accumulated charge carriers at the organic semiconductor and dielectric interface. When a negative gate–source bias is applied in p-type organic semiconductor, hole carriers are accumulated in the organic semiconductor.21The charge carriers in OFETs are affected by the presence of gas molecules. When gas molecules are diffused into the semiconducting layer and arrive at the interface between the semiconductor and gate dielectric, the electrical characteristics can be changed by multiple factors, such as charge trapping, doping, and/or altering the molecular arrangement of the semiconductor.2Researchers have tried to improve gas sensing properties through structural and morphological modification of an organic semiconductor layer or device structure.22,23

Here, defects of the organic semiconductors, such as grain boundaries, provide sites for the gas diffusion pathway. In one report, the sensitivity of gas sensors was enhanced by increasing the number of grain boundaries; however, the recovery rate was not greatly improved.24The diffusion process through grain boundaries is regarded as slow, mainly due to the interaction between organic semiconductor and target gas molecules. As an alternative approach, gas sensing properties were improved by reducing the thickness of organic semiconductor film, having a porous film structure, or introducing organic semiconductors in the form of nanowires.25-30These results hint that control of the gas diffusion pathway is a direct way to increase gas sensing properties based on OFETs. However, systematic studies that have revealed direct correlation between patterning shape/dimension and gas sensing performance have not previously been reported.

In this work, we examined the gas sensing properties of the TES-ADT FET devices by patterning the TES-ADT layer in the form of microcrystal arrays. The engraved PDMS mold containing solvent was utilized both for the patterning and crystallization of TES-ADT layer. The length of edges in the TES-ADT microcrystal arrays were varied by changing the engraved patterns (i.e., rectangular, grooves) in PDMS. The edge portions can provide an accessible pathway for gas molecules to diffuse into the interface between the organic semiconductor and the gate dielectric. Gas sensing properties were measured by using NO2as a target gas. Monitoring NO2is important for its toxicity in human health.31In addition, detecting levels of nitrogen oxides in out-breathing can be utilized in diagnostic tools, such as for patients with asthma.32-34The NO2sensing properties of the OFETs were systematically analyzed depending on the pattern shape of TES-ADT crystals. Our study provides new perspectives on the diffusion pathway of gas molecules in the OFET-based gas sensor and will be useful for the development of organic semiconductor-based gas sensors.

Figure1shows the schematics of the fabrication process of the TES-ADT microcrystal arrays. PDMS molds with different channel widths were soaked in 1.2 dichloroethane (DCE), and excess DCE was removed by blowing with nitrogen. Then, PDMS molds containing DCE were placed onto the TES-ADT films, which had previously been spin coated onto SiO2/Si substrates. While the TES-ADT films with contact regions were selectively removed, TES-ADT films with noncontact regions were crystallized by the DCE vapor within the PDMS molds. Thus, TES-ADT microcrystal arrays with different line widths were successfully fabricated, and the dimensions of the TES-ADT crystals were determined by control of the engraved patterns in the contact region of the PDMS molds.

Figure2shows patterned TES-ADT microcrystals with various dimensions after deposition of the Au source and drain electrodes. Type A was fabricated by PDMS mold with engraved rectangular pattern, while types B and C were fabricated with PDMS molds with groove patterns. After initial measurement of the electrical properties of TES-ADT microcrystals as shown in Figure4, the 5 lines in type B and 2 lines in type C were removed to match the total channel width, to allow accurate comparisons of the gas sensor performance (Figure5). Because structural defects, such as grain boundary, can affect the electrical properties of gas sensors based on TES-ADT, polarized optical microscopy (POM) images of TES-ADT microcrystals depending on the types of TES-ADT pattern were analyzed (Figure3). Spherulitic growth of TES-ADT was commonly reported in solvent vapor annealed TES-ADT film. Grain growth under a solvent vapor environment is limited when one grain collides with other grains, thereby forming grain boundaries. In our experiment, crystallization in the confined zone (i.e., rectangular, groove) restricts radial growth of the TES-ADT crystals. Specifically, grain growth is limited when grain reaches a zone end where TES-ADT molecules are no longer available at the PDMS mold. The growth behaviors of grain were identified with the shape and density of grain boundaries (indicated by white arrows). As the line width becomes narrower (A → B → C), 1D growth behavior becomes apparent. Note that grain boundaries are located in the vertical direction along the line in the line patterns (B and C). This result is in line with our previous report, which observed 1D growth of TES-ADT crystals in line-patterned PDMS mold.16The total lengths of grain boundaries within the channel region between source and drain electrodes were extracted from the POM images, andTable1gives the average grain boundary lengths from five images of each type. Although the surface area of TES-ADT film is nearly the same (see Figure2bottom image), the grain boundary length decreases in the following order: A (283 µm) > B (169 µm) > C (147 µm). These results indicate that 1D growth of TES-ADT crystals in the pattern with narrow line width prefers to have fewer grain boundaries. This result can be explained by considering the growth speed of TES-ADT crystals in the confined zone. The line pattern with narrower line width exhibits higher growth speed, because the solvent vapor pressure under PDMS stamping is higher at the narrower engraved patterns.

Figure4shows the electrical properties of TES-ADT FETs depending on the type of TES-ADT pattern. We measured the electrical properties before removing the lines in types B and C (Figure2top). Figure4a (left) shows the normalized source–drain current (gm) versus gate voltage curves of the three FETs, wheregmis defined as (−ID) ×L/W. Thegmvalue reflects the normalized current of FETs with different channel widths. Thegmvalue is ordered as follows: Type A < B < C. The calculated field-effect mobility at the saturation regime also follows the same order (Figure4b andTable2). As the line width of the TES-ADT pattern deceases, the field-effect mobility increases. On the other hand, the current on–off ratios and threshold voltages are nearly the same (Figure4a (right) and Table2). Because the grain boundary provides charge trapping sites, the decreased grain boundary length in type C facilitates the lateral transport of the charge carriers (Figure3and Table1). We speculate that the 1D alignment of TES-ADT molecules under the confined line zone also contributes to the increase of field-effect mobility.17

The channel width was unified by removing several lines in types B and C devices (Figure2(bottom)). Because surface area of the TES-ADT crystals is unified for three devices, the amount of adsorbed NO2molecules is nearly the same. The dynamic gas sensing properties of TES-ADT FETs were measured by using 30 ppm NO2as a target gas (Figure5a). Consecutive NO2and N2gases were inserted into the chamber for 50 and 150 s, respectively. Gate bias (VG) of −20 V was applied to the FETs under gas flow to amplify the current signal, while the source–drain bias (VD) of −10 V enables transport of the accumulated hole carriers from source to drain electrodes. Because continuous gate bias was applied to the FETs, current decay was observed in the FETs with line-patterned TES-ADT films. In general, the current decay originates from the bias instability, and the bias instability in our experiment is possibly due to the edges in line-patterned TES-ADT films. The comparative plots in Figure5b were obtained by baseline subtraction with stretched-exponential equation.35The normalized source–drain current increases with exposure to NO2, which has an electron withdrawing character for the accumulation of hole carriers. Because TES-ADT is a p-type semiconductor in the FETs with Au source/drain electrodes, the current increases upon exposure to NO2.36,37The detailed sensing performance (i.e., response rate, recovery rate, sensitivity) was extracted from Figure5c andTable3. The sensing performance was ordered as follows: Type C > B > A. The sensing performance of FETs of line-patterned TES-ADT film with narrower line width is superior to those of FETs of patterned TES-ADT film with wider line width. This result is closely related to the shape of the TES-ADT pattern and microstructure within the TES-ADT film.

We compared the gas sensing performance quantitatively by analyzing the length of the gas penetration pathway (Figure6a and Table1). The grain boundary length was measured by summing the lengths of the grain boundary regions between the source and drain electrodes in POM images. In addition, the total pathway length of NO2molecules was determined by summing the grain boundary length and the edge length of the TES-ADT microcrystal arrays. Note that NO2molecules do not penetrate into the bulk TES-ADT crystals. In our previous report, the grain boundary is regarded as a diffusion pathway of gas molecules for a fully covered TES-ADT film, which was fabricated through spin casting and subsequent solvent vapor annealing.24In the FET-based sensors, gas molecules should arrive at the semiconductor-dielectric interface by diffusion into the semiconducting layer for the field-effect charge carriers to be affected. In this experiment, the grain boundary length is the longest in Type A, but the sensitivity is the lowest, when compared to other types with longer edge length. Thus, it can be inferred that not only the grain boundary, but also the edge of the microcrystal arrays can act as a penetration pathway. The increase of field effect mobility with decreasing line width might not be a dominant factor for the enhanced sensitivity. When we tested sensor performance of TES-ADT FETs with similar field-effect mobility, sensitivity and recovery rate of Type B are better than those of Type A (Figure S1 and Table S1 in the Supporting Information). The comparison curve of sensitivity versus total pathway length indicated that the gas sensing performance is mostly determined by the diffusion pathway of gas molecules (Figure6b).

The schematic ofFigure7shows the gas sensing mechanism of the patterned TES-ADT FETs. NO2diffuses into the TES-ADT microcrystal arrays through grain boundaries and crystal edges, and thus the gases at the semiconductor-dielectric interface increase hole carriers, thereby leading to an increased response rate in TES-ADT line patterns with narrow width (type C). In addition, the trapped NO2gas can escape more easily from the semiconductor-dielectric interface when there are plenty of crystal edges. For this region, type C also showed the highest recovery rate. The obtained sensor performance is similar to that of a recent report.24The selectivity of our sensors based on patterned TES-ADT crystals will be an interesting research point for validating our methodology. Recent reports revealed that gas sensors based on 6,13-bis(triisopropylsilylethynyl)pentacene (TIPS-pentacene) have excellent selectivity with NO2.37Thus, we surmise that our sensors will exhibit selective sensing characteristics of NO2possibly due to the chemical similarity between TES-ADT and TIPS-pentacene.

We systematically studied the gas sensing properties of OFET gas sensors based on various types of patterned TES-ADT films. Solvent soaked PDMS mold was used to fabricate patterned TES-ADT crystal arrays at the noncontact region by selective etching at the contact region. The field-effect mobility of OFETs was increased with decreasing width of the TES-ADT line pattern. This is due to the decreased total length of the grain boundaries in the channel region of TES-ADT crystal arrays. Gas sensing properties were examined by measuring the current change under periodic NO2(30 ppm) exposure. The sensing performance of TES-ADT films with narrower line width is superior to those of TES-ADT films with wider line width. This is due to the increased area of crystal edges, which provides a gas diffusion pathway for gas detection. Our study provides a rational design rule for the active channel to boost the gas sensing properties of OFETs.

Preparation of the PDMS Mold: Si master molds with various dimensions were fabricated by UV lithography. A SU-8 photoresist from MicroChem was spun on a silicon wafer (thickness of 80 µm), and subsequently, the photoresist was baked at 65 °C for 3 min and 90 °C for 9 min to remove residual solvent. Then, UV was selectively irradiated onto the photoresist through a mask aligner. The patterned mold was fabricated after developing for 7 min in a developer, followed by baking at 110 °C for 10 min. A PDMS mixture (Sylgard 184) with 10:1 ratio of a prepolymer and a curing agent was spun onto the Si master, and the PDMS/Si master was annealed for 2 h in a conventional oven at 65 °C. The cured PDMS layer was peeled away from the Si master, thereby producing PDMS mold with various engraved patterns (e.g., rectangular pattern, groove patterns).

Materials and Fabrication of TES-ADT FETs: TES-ADT was synthesized according to the synthetic route by Anthony and coworkers.12Heavily doped silicon wafers containing 300 nm thick SiO2layer (with the capacitance of 10.8 nF cm−2) were purchased from Fine Science. The wafers were cut into pieces of (2 cm × 2 cm) size, and cleaned by ultrasonication in acetone and isopropyl alcohol for 20 min. Then the wafers were quickly rinsed with isopropyl alcohol, and dried with nitrogen gas. UV/ozone treatment was performed for 20 min to modify the surface of silicon wafers. The 1.5 wt% TES-ADT solution in toluene was spin casted onto precleaned silicon wafers at ≈1000 rpm for 60 s. As-spun TES-ADT films were immediately transferred to a hot plate fixed at 95 °C, and dried in a vacuum oven to remove excess residual solvent. To fabricate the patterned TES-ADT crystals, PDMS mold was immersed in DCE for 10 min, and excess DCE in the PDMS mold was removed by blowing nitrogen gas. The DCE-containing PDMS mold was placed onto the TES-ADT film under a mild pressure of about 3 kPa. PDMS mold was carefully removed from the silicon substrate. Finally, the patterned TES-ADT crystals on SiO2/Si were placed in a vacuum oven to remove residual solvent. To examine the electrical properties of FETs based on TES-ADT microcrystals, 60 nm thick Au source and drain electrodes were thermally deposited on the TES-ADT microcrystal arrays with channel length and width of 100 and 2000 µm, respectively.

Characterization: The morphologies of TES-ADT crystals were characterized by a polarized optical microscope (OLYMPUS BX51). Electrical characteristics of TES-ADT FETs were measured using a probe station (MS TECH) in connection with a semiconductor parameter analyzer (Keithley 4200-SCS). To collect transfer characteristics, gate voltage (VG) was swept from 40 to −80 V in increments of −1 V, while source–drain voltage (VD) was fixed at −80 V. The gas sensing properties of TES-ADT FETs were measured using a gas sensor set-up (Precision Sensor System Inc., GASENTEST) operated in room temperature. Target NO2gas was prepared by mixing 30 ppm NO2gas with N2base gas. All the experiments were conducted in a chamber in which the N2base gas was purged. To observe the dynamic change of drain current under the exposure to the NO2gas, periodic NO2and N2gases were inserted to the chamber at the given time interval and source–drain current was monitored at the fixedVGandVDof −20 and −10 V, respectively.

This paper was supported by Konkuk University Researcher Fund in 2019. This was also supported by grants from the Basic Science Research Program (Code No. 2019R1A2C1010723) of the Ministry of Science, ICT and Future Planning, Korea and the Korea Institute of Energy Technology Evaluation and Planning and the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Energy (MOTIE, 20174010201490).

The authors declare no conflict of interest.

Please note: The publisher is not responsible for the content or functionality of any supporting information supplied by the authors. Any queries (other than missing content) should be directed to the corresponding author for the article.

Volume7,Issue4

February 21, 2020

1901696

Copyright © 1999-2025John Wiley & Sons, Incor related companies. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence technologies or similar technologies.

Your password has been changed

Enter your email address below.

Please check your email for instructions on resetting your password.
                    If you do not receive an email within 10 minutes, your email address may not be registered,
                    and you may need to create a new Wiley Online Library account.

Can't sign in? Forgot your username?

Enter your email address below and we will send you your username

If the address matches an existing account you will receive an email with instructions to retrieve your username