Real-Time Monitoring of Nitric Oxide at Single-Cell Level with Porphyrin-Functionalized Graphene Field-Effect Transistor Biosensor
Hui Xie†∥Yu-Tao Li†∥Yong-Min Lei†Yan-Ling Liu‡Meng-Meng Xiao§Chuan Gao†Dai-Wen Pang‡Wei-Hua Huang*‡Zhi-Yong Zhang*§Guo-Jun Zhang*†
View Author InformationView Author Information
Open PDF
Supporting Information (1)
OpenURL UNIV OF CHICAGO
Abstract

An ultrasensitive and highly efficient assay for real-time monitoring of nitric oxide (NO) at single-cell level based on a reduced graphene oxide (RGO) and iron–porphyrin-functionalized graphene (FGPCs) field-effect transistor (FET) biosensor is reported. A layer-to-layer assembly of RGO and FGPCs on a prefabricated FET sensor surface through π–π stacking interaction allowed superior electrical conductivity caused by RGO, and highly catalytic specificity induced by metalloporphyrin, ensuring the ultrasensitive and highly specific detection of NO. The results demonstrated that the RGO/FGPCs FET biosensor was capable of real-time monitoring of NO in the range from 1 pM to 100 nM with the limit of detection as low as 1 pM in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) and 10 pM in the cell medium, respectively. Moreover, the developed biosensor could be used for real-time monitoring of NO released from human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs) at single-cell level. Along with its miniaturized sizes, ultrasensitive characteristics, and fast response, the FET biosensor is promising as a new platform for potential biological and diagnostic applications.

This publication is licensed under the terms of your institutional subscription. Request reuse permissions.

Copyright © 2016 American Chemical Society
Subjects
what are subjects
Biotechnology
Oxides
Particulate matter
Sensors
Two dimensional materials
Nitric oxide (NO) is a gas transfer in the human body involved in a number of physiological activities. Actually, NO plays as a transceiver, which can receive and convey information to regulate cell activity (1-5) and instruct the body to perform certain important functions, such as neurotransmission, (6) vasodilation, (7) immune responses, (8, 9) and angiogenesis, (10) etc. To comprehensively understand the physiological roles of NO for therapeutic purposes, it is desirable to probe the production and diffusion processes of NO in biological systems. However, NO, as an active gas species, is present at nanomolar-level concentrations in the body with relative short half-life (<10 s). (11) Moreover, it is easily oxidized by oxygen, superoxide, NO2–, or NO3– ions, (12, 13) making it difficult to exactly quantify the NO levels in biological systems.
Many techniques have been developed for NO detection such as bioassay, electron magnetic resonance spectroscopy, luminol/hydrogen peroxide chemiluminescence, laser-induced fluorescence, spectrophotometric assay, etc. (14-19) However, most of these methods suffer from high costs or complicated pretreatments or low sensitivity, which restrict real-time measurement. (20) Electrochemical detection provides a useful tool to directly measure NO in real time with high sensitivity and ultrafast response time, which has been widely used for NO detection in biological systems. (21-23) Yet, electrochemical NO sensors are usually operated at a relatively high oxidation potential (>0.6 V) to achieve the goal of NO detection. Such an attempt can disturb the intrinsic cellular response or induce significant signal interference from other electrochemically active molecular species. Compared to amperometric electrodes, field-effect transistor (FET) nanobiosensors allow real-time monitoring of physiological information with higher sensitivity due to their intrinsic amplification capabilities and high signal-to-noise ratio. (24-29) More importantly, it is operated at a relatively lower detection potential (Vds = 0.1 V), which has little impact on cells. So it will be very meaningful to detect NO in physiological processes by using the FET biosensor.
In recent years, several works have been reported for real-time monitoring of NO in physiological solution based on semiconductor FETs. Wu et al. reported a GaAs-based semiconductor FET for detection of NO in physiological solution, in which hemin molecules were self-assembled on the GaAs surface. (30) Li et al. developed a graphene-based FET biosensor for detecting NO gas, in which the sensitive channels were composed by a palladium-decorated reduced graphene oxide (RGO). (31) However, the sensitivity of the recently developed sensors is still limited to the micromolar or submicromolar level, and these sensors are not suitable for nanomolar levels cell detection. As known, the sensitivity is codetermined by some important factors including device fabrication, selection of nanomaterials, surface chemistry, etc. Recently, Jiang et al. developed a NO sensor based on hemin-functionalized graphene FET for directly detecting NO in living cell with subnanomolar sensitivity. (32) Nevertheless, in order to realize real-time monitoring of NO release at single-cell level, sensitivity needs to be further improved. Cells are the basic unit of the organism, and knowledge at the single-cell level will enhance the understanding of diverse cellular processes such as intracellular and intercellular communication, cell differentiation, physiological effects of external stimuli and disease states, etc. Additionally, for diagnosis of cell-based diseases, it is important to develop methods of extremely high sensitivity down to single-cell level to gain the best ability for diagnosis. (33-35)
In this work, we explore an excellent performance of FET biosensor by combination of a highly specific molecular metalloporphyrin and a highly electrical conductivity of graphene for ultrasensitive and highly specific monitoring of NO in real time (Figure 1). An RGO sheet on the prefabricated FET sensor surface as a highly conductive bridge to facilitate rapid transport of electrons between source and drain is introduced, as reported previously. Afterward, the composite of Fe(III) meso-tetra(4-carboxyphenyl)porphyrin (FeTCP) and RGO, named FGPCs, is then deposited onto the RGO layer. Not only does the formation of the compound (FGPCs) show superb nature in selectivity and sensitivity, but it also improves electrical contact between FeTCP and graphene. (36, 37) The layer-to-layer assembly of RGO and FGPCs on the FET channel greatly enhances electrical conductivity, making the sensor superior in performance. The developed method thus provides the practicable development of rapid, robust, high-performance, and low-cost diagnostic systems.
Figure 1

Figure 1. Schematic diagram of the RGO/FGPCs FET biosensor for real-time monitoring of NO release from cell.

Experimental Section
Materials
Graphite powder (99.99995%, 325 mesh) was purchased from Alfa Aesar Co. Ltd. (Tianjin, China). Hydrazine (98%), N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF), and ammonia solution (25 wt %) were purchased from Generay Biotech Co. Ltd. (Shanghai, China). FeTCP was purchased from Frontier Scientific, Inc. (Logan, UT, U.S.A.). Nitric oxide synthase (NOS) inhibitor, Nω-nitro-l-arginine methyl ester hydrochloride (l-NAME), and l-arginine (l-Arg) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO, U.S.A.). Trypan blue was purchased from Becton, Dickinson and Company (Franklin Lakes, NJ, U.S.A.). The cell culture medium RPMI-1640, l-glutamine, and HEPES were purchased from Thermo Fisher Scientific (Waltham, MA, U.S.A.). The human umnilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs) were obtained from the Central South University (Changsha, China). NO gas (99.9%) was purchased from Kodi Gas Chemical Industry Co. Ltd. (Foshan, China). Ultrapure water was obtained from a Millipore water purification system (18.2 MΩ resistivity, Milli-Q Direct 8). All the chemicals used in this study were of analytical grade. All other chemicals unless specified were reagent grade and used without further purification.
Preparation of RGO
The RGO suspensions were prepared according to the previously reported method. (38) First, graphite oxide (GO) was prepared by a modified Hummer’s method. (39) Then, 10 mg of GO was added to 10 mL of 98% hydrazine followed by sonication for 45 min to produce a black suspension of hydrazinium graphene, and the suspension was placed for 1 week to obtain the thorough reduction of GO. The stability of the RGO suspensions (0.2 mg/mL) was investigated for 1, 3, and 8 months, respectively. It is clearly shown in Figure S1 that RGO suspensions could be stable for months with little aggregation, which has been demonstrated by the previously published paper. (38)
Preparation of FGPCs
The FGPCs were produced by the following processes. (36, 40) Briefly, 6 mg of GO was dissolved into 10 mL of ultrapure water and sonicated for 20 min at room temperature to obtain a homogeneous suspension. Afterward, 10 mg of FeTCP, dispersed in 2.0 mL of DMF/water (4:1, v/v), was dropped into the suspension. The mixture was further sonicated for 60 min. During this process, FeTCP and graphene were noncovalently combined through strong π–π stacking and hydrophobic interactions. The iron–porphyrin-functionalized graphene oxide was obtained through centrifugation (12 000g, 45 min), and redispersed into 6 mL of ultrapure water. Subsequently, 5 μL of hydrazine solution and 50 μL of ammonia solution were added to the above solution, and the mixture was put in an oil bath at 100 °C for 70 min under vigorous agitation. The resulting black dispersion was subsequently filtered through a nylon membrane (0.15 μm) and thoroughly washed with ultrapure water until the pH value of the filtrate reached 7.0. The as-prepared nanocomposites were ultrasonically dispersed in ultrapure water to obtain an FGPCs solution (0.12 mg/mL). The prepared solution could be stable for months as shown in Figure S2a.
Fabrication of RGO/FGPCs Biosensors
The fabrication of the FET biosensor chip was performed by using the standard semiconductor technology, as reported. (38) To construct the RGO layer on the prefabricated FET chip, diluted RGO suspension (0.15 mg/mL) was drop-cast onto the channel and thermally annealed at 80 °C for 2 h in order to enhance the contact between the RGO and the electrodes. Then, the FGPCs nanocomposites suspension was further drop-cast on the RGO FET biosensors. The RGO/FGPCs FET biosensors were then accomplished and used for detection.
NO Solution Preparation
NO stock solution was prepared by bubbling the purified NO gas (99.9%) into phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) solution (pH = 7.4) until saturation, in which the PBS solutions were prebubbled with purified nitrogen for 30 min to remove the dissolved oxygen. The concentration of the saturated NO in PBS was 1.8 mM at room temperature. NO gas is toxic at concentrations higher than 100 ppm, so the bubbling procedure was carried out in a fume hood. NO standard solutions were freshly prepared by serial dilution of the saturated NO solutions for experiments.
Human Umbilical Vein Endothelial Cell Culture and Manipulation
HUVECs were cultured in RPMI-1640 media supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum at 37 °C in a humidified incubator with 5% CO2. For real-time detection of NO, a self-made liquid reservoir was mounted on the sensing channel (Figure S2b), after which the total device was sterilized for 30 min via UV light in a biosafety cabinet. After being digested by pancreatic enzyme, HUVECs were seeded into the above-mentioned chamber at a density of ∼1 × 105 cell/cm2. After 10 h of incubation, cells were used for stimulation and detection.
Electrical Measurements
All the measurements regarding the electrical characterization of the FET biosensors were conducted with a liquid gate at room temperature with a Keithley 4200 semiconductor characterization system combined with a probe station (EverBeing BD-6). For electrical transfer curve measurements of the FET biosensor, a silver wire reference electrode was used as a gate electrode immersed in buffer solution with a constant bias Vds = 0.1 V (the drain-source voltage). Output curves were measured at an assigned Vg value. All the sensing measurements were carried out under ambient conditions. To realize real-time measurement, a self-made reservoir was mounted on the chip for the solution exchange (Figure S2b).
Characterizations
The X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) was performed on an ESCALAB 250 Xi XPS system (Thermo Fisher, U.S.A.) equipped with a monochromatic Al Kα source radiation. UV–vis absorption spectra were recorded on a UV-2550 spectrophotometer (Shimadzu, Japan). The X-ray energy-dispersive spectrum (EDS) was detected by a Genesis 2000 XMS (EDAX, U.S.A.).
Results and Discussion
Preparation and Characterization of FGPCs Sheets
The FGPCs were prepared as previously reported. (36, 40) Briefly, a homogeneous suspension of GO and FeTCP was ultrasonically mixed, then hydrazine hydrate was added to the above solution to reduce the GO through strong π–π stacking and hydrophobic interactions. Afterward, GO and FeTCP would successfully composite together, resulting in the FGPCs suspensions.
First, the prepared FGPCs were characterized by UV–vis absorption spectroscopy. As shown in Figure 2a, the GO dispersion displayed a main absorption at 233 nm (cyan line) with a shoulder at around 300 nm, and the characteristic peak of FeTCP at 396 nm (orange line). After hydrazine reduction, the peak shifted to 265 nm (olive line), which was attributed to the π–π* transition of aromatic C═C bonds. (41) This means that GO has been reduced to RGO. Upon FeTCP absorption on the surface of the graphene sheet, the FGPCs compound displayed two broad absorption bands at 269 and 432 nm (pink line), respectively, in which 269 nm was the RGO absorption band caused by the restoration of sp2 structure in GO after functionalization with FeTCP via two π-electron systems between GO and FeTCP. Additionally, the red shift of FeTCP from 396 to 432 nm (pink line) was attributed to the π–π interaction between graphene and FeTCP. (42)
Figure 2

Figure 2. Characterizations of FGPCs. (a) UV–vis spectra of FGPCs suspension (pink line), RGO suspension (olive line), FeTCP solution (orange line), and GO suspension (cyan line). (b) The wide-energy XPS spectra of FGPCs (blue line) and GO (green line). Inset: narrow-energy XPS spectra of Fe 2p element in FGPCs (blue line) and GO (green line).

To further prove that FGPCs were synthesized successfully, XPS was employed to further explore the interaction between RGO and FeTCP. As shown in Figure 2b, the wide-energy XPS spectra of FGPCs (blue line) and GO (green line) were obtained, respectively. Both C 1s and O 1s peaks were obviously observed, which were attributed to the abundant elements in FGPCs and GO. In order to differentiate FGPCs and GO, narrow-energy XPS spectra of Fe 2p peak were analyzed and zoomed in the inset. A remarkable Fe 2p peak was seen from FGPCs, while the peak did not appear from GO. The result further reveals that the FGPCs compound has been successfully prepared as anticipated.
Furthermore, EDS analysis was also performed to estimate the Fe content in the FGPCs (Figure S3). It was obvious that the characteristic peak of Fe appeared. The results further demonstrate the prosperous synthesis of FGPCs.
Electrical Performance of the FET Biosensor
RGO was drop-cast on the prefabricated FET chip surface, as mentioned above. For purpose of verifying that the FGPCs were assembled on the RGO surface of the FET biosensor, the output transfer characteristics between the RGO FET biosensor and the RGO/FGPCs FET biosensor were compared. Figure 3a shows the transfer curves of the RGO/FGPCs and the RGO FET biosensor. The Ids–Vg curves of both sensors revealed an obvious ambipolar characteristic. The RGO/FGPCs FET displayed a left-shift Dirac voltage compared to that of the RGO FET biosensor. As discussed earlier, (43) as the RGO FET biosensor was p-type doped, contribution of the negatively charged FeTCP caused a doping effect and made the Dirac point left-shifted. To investigate the electrical property of the RGO/FGPCs FET biosensor, the Ids–Vds output characteristics of the RGO/FGPCs FET were obtained. As shown in Figure 3b, the drain current decreased when the gate voltage was increased from −0.3 to 0.3 V, manifesting that the biosensor was p-type doped.
Figure 3

Figure 3. (a) Comparison of Ids–Vg curves before and after depositing FGPCs on the RGO FET sensors. (b) Ids–Vds output characteristics of the RGO/FGPCs FET sensors. The gate voltage is varied from −0.3 to 0.3 V with an interval of 0.1 V.

Selectivity
The selectivity of the RGO/FGPCs FET biosensor was further studied by selecting some potentially interfering substances according to the literatures. (32, 36)Figure 4a shows real-time measurement of the RGO/FGPCs FET biosensors to interfering substances and NO, respectively. Various interferences (10 μM), like uric acid (UA), sodium ascorbate (Asc), glycine (Gly), l-arginine (l-Arg), hydrogen peroxide (H2O2), potassium nitrate (KNO3), and 1 μM NO, were applied in sequence. As could be seen, when high concentrations of interferences were introduced, the change of the corresponding current was negligible. The small current change could be attributed to the nonspecific adsorption. On the contrary, when a lower concentration of NO was injected, a dramatically decreasing change of current was obtained. To make the comparison clearly, the drain current change versus NO and the interferences are summarized in Figure 4b. The drain current changes of UA, Asc, Gly, l-Arg, H2O2, and KNO3 were about 0.0037, 0.0089, 0.0056, 0.003, 0.008, 0.0043, respectively. However, the drain current change of NO was found to be approximately 0.046. As NO was specific to the FGPCs interface, the other substances were nonspecific. The maximum drain current change of 0.046 from NO was then taken as the reference. On the basis of the calculation (the drain current change of other substances/the maximum drain current change), the ratios were obtained as 8.0%, 19%, 12%, 6.5%, 17%, 9.3%, and 100%. Hence, it can be concluded that the RGO/FGPCs FET biosensors showed a remarkable conductance change to NO, but a negligible conductance change toward other interferences. The results suggest that the RGO/FGPCs FET biosensor is of high selectivity.
Figure 4

Figure 4. (a) Selectivity measurement with the addition of a series of interference solutions (all chemicals have the same concentration of 10 μM; uric acid, sodium ascorbate, glycine, l-arginine, hydrogen peroxide, and potassium nitrate) followed by NO solutions (1 μM). (b) The current change of the RGO/FGPCs FET sensors to a series of interference solutions and NO. Signal is defined by ΔI/I0, where ΔI is the current change [drain current (Ids) – initial drain current (I0)] and I0 is the initial drain current. The signals are the average of three devices.

Reproducibility, Repeatability, and Stability
First, in order to verify that the RGO/FGPCs FET device had excellent reproducibility, Ids–Vg transfer characteristic curves from four different RGO/FGPCs devices, six sensors on each chip, were recorded. The change of Dirac voltage was then analyzed and compared. As shown in the Figure 5a, the current–gate voltage (Ids–Vg) characteristics for all 24 sensors of four chips looked very similar. The Dirac points of all the RGO/FGPCs devices, where the Ids–Vg characteristic had a minimum, lie in a narrow range, 0.4 ± 0.01 V (Figure 5b), indicating a satisfactory reproducibility in the fabrication of the chip devices.
Figure 5

Figure 5. (a) Ids–Vg characteristics of 24 RGO/FGPCs biosensors, showing excellent reproducibility. (b) Histogram of the Dirac voltage extracted from the Ids–Vg characteristics along with a Gaussian fit to the data (red curve). (c) Repeatability of the RGO/FGPCs biosensor for detecting 1 μM NO concentration for 8 times. (d) Stability test for the RGO/FGPCs biosensor over 15 days.

Second, the repeatability test to verify the excellent property of the RGO/FGPCs biosensors was also conducted. A single RGO/FGPCs biosensor was chosen to repeatedly detect 1 μM NO concentration for 8 times. As seen in Figure 5c, the Dirac voltage change of the sensor remained nearly the same after eight measurements and a relative standard deviation (RSD) of 1.73% was obtained, indicating high repeatability of the sensor.
Third, the stability of the RGO/FGPCs biosensors was evaluated by storing the functionalized device in a vacuum oven for a period of times and using it for the detection of 1 μM NO. As shown in the Figure 5d, the shift of the Dirac voltage retained more than 93% of its original value over 7 days. Even after 15 days, it still kept 87% of its original value. This signal decrease is probably because of nonspecific surface adsorptions caused by air and water in the environment.
Real-Time Electrical Detection of NO
The sensitivity of the RGO/FGPCs FET biosensor was examined by applying the freshly prepared NO solutions of increasing concentrations, ranging from 100 fM to 100 nM, to the RGO/FGPCs FET biosensor. Figure 6a shows a real-time electrical response to different concentrations of NO from 100 fM to 100 nM in PBS. An initial baseline for the conductance of the biosensor was established by injecting buffer (0.001× PBS) into the liquid chamber without adding NO. Then, 100 fM NO was injected, causing a slight current change. While 1 pM NO was applied, a significant change was observed. With the increasing concentrations of NO solution, the decreasing current was obtained, which was ascribed to the electron doping effect in the p-doped biosensor. To be specific, when immobilizing the FeTCP onto the surface of graphene, the Fe(III) center in porphyrin could interact with graphene to form a metal–ligand model through a cation−π interaction. When NO molecules come to coordinate, and donate electrons to the Fe(III) center, the stronger coordination between NO and the Fe(III) center weakens the coordination between graphene and the Fe(III) center. Then those π-electrons are partially transferred back to the valence band of graphene. The result is in good agreement with that described by other reports. (44) The limit of detection of 1 pM in PBS was determined based on the signal that exceeds the baseline by 3 times. Moreover, it was observed that the typical response time of this FET biosensor to NO was estimated to be about 480 ms, exhibiting that the FET biosensor had a fast response. The inset graph shows the current change (ΔI) versus different concentrations of NO. The logarithmic value of NO concentration defined as lg C showed a linear response with the drain current change. The linear relationship was represented by ΔI (nA) = 79.4 lg CNO (M) + 1000, clearly revealing that the current decreased along with the increasing NO concentrations. Error bars represent standard deviations of measurements (n = 3).
Figure 6

Figure 6. Real-time electrical detection of NO. (a) Real-time electrical measurement at different concentrations of NO solution in PBS. Inset: the response of the RGO/FGPCs FET biosensors to NO at a series of concentrations (1, 10, 100 pM and 1, 10, and 100 nM) in PBS. (b) Real-time electrical measurement at different concentrations of NO solution in the cell medium. Inset: the response of the RGO/FGPCs FET biosensors to NO at a series of concentrations (10, 100 pM and 1, 10, and 100 nM) in fetal bovine serum.

To further ascertain that the RGO/FGPCs FET biosensor could work well in complex physiological solutions, the NO sensing measurements in real biological samples, fetal bovine serum (FBS) containing a large variety of potentially interfering species at physiological levels in Roswell Park Memorial Institute 1640 (RPMI-1640), were also conducted. Figure 6b shows a real-time electrical response to different concentrations of NO from 1 pM to 100 nM in the cell medium. Different concentrations of NO were spiked into the RPMI-1640 solution. An initial baseline for the conductance of the biosensor was established by injecting RPMI-1640 into the liquid chamber without adding NO. It was clearly observed that the current reduced as the concentration of NO increased, which is consistent with the above-mentioned experimental results. A negligible current change was obtained when 1 pM NO was injected. Similarly, the limit of detection was found to be 10 pM based on the signal that exceeds the baseline by 3-fold. The experiments demonstrate the sensor’s satisfactory performance in complex physiological solutions. The inset graph shows the current change (ΔI) versus different concentrations of NO in RPMI-1640 solution containing fetal bovine serum. The linear relationship was represented by ΔI (nA) =72.7 lg CNO (M) + 830.7, clearly revealing that the current decreased along with the increasing NO concentrations. The results are in consistent with the above-mentioned real-time measurement results.
The sensitivity of different biosensors for NO detection was compared, as illustrated in Table 1. Several techniques, like electrochemistry, fluorescence. and FET, have been applied to detect NO. For example, Kim et al. synthesized a 3,4-diaminophenyl-functionalized dextran (DAP-dex) wrapping for single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWNTs) that imparted rapid and selective fluorescence detection of NO with a sensitivity of 30 nM. (19) Lim et al. reported copper-based probes for real-time detection of NO with a sensitivity of 5 nM. (45) Meanwhile, Shahid et al. reported an RGO–cobalt oxide nanocube@platinum nanocomposite toward the electrochemical detection of NO with a sensitivity of 1730 nM. (46) Li et al. developed a facile approach to growing Au nanoparticles on highly porous 3D graphene hydrogel toward NO oxidation and achieved a sensitivity of 9 nM. (47) To further challenge with high sensitivity, Liu et al. reported an electrochemical method based on metalloporphyrin-functionalized RGO for NO detection and the high sensitivity of 55 pM was obtained. (36) Very recently, Jiang et al. developed a hemin-functionalized graphene FET to directly detect NO with the detection limit down to 0.3 nM. (32) It is obvious that the sensitivity can be improved in the case that some molecules like porphyrin or hemin are employed. As seen in Table 1, compared with other sensors for the determination of NO, the RGO/FGPCs FET biosensor obtained the lowest detection limit.
Table 1. Comparison of Different Sensors for the Determination of NO
electrode materials	methods	sensitivity (nM)	ref
SWNTDAP-dex	fluorescence	30	Kim ( 19)
copper(II)	fluorescence	5	Lim ( 45)
RGO-Co3O4@Pt	electrochemistry	1730	Shahid ( 46)
Au NPs–3DGH	electrochemistry	9.0	Li ( 47)
G-FeTCP	electrochemistry	0.055	Liu ( 36)
GaAs-hemin	FET	1000	Wu ( 30)
G-hemin	FET	0.3	Jiang ( 32)
RGO/FGPCs	FET	0.001	this work
The sensitivity improvement of the fabricated FET biosensor can be ascribed in the following two points. First, as is well-known, the metalloporphyrin has four carboxyl groups. After the metalloporphyrin was functionalized with RGO, the strong adhesion between the metalloporphyrin and the RGO surface occurred, promoting charge transfer from metalloporphyrin to graphene, thus enhancing central iron core catalytic activity. (48, 49) As a result, the FGPCs showed excellent catalytic performance after they were drop-cast on the RGO surface. Second, to further prove the superior electrical properties of the RGO/FGPCs biosensors, the response of the three individual biosensors (RGO/FeTCP biosensors, RGO/RGO biosensor, and RGO/FGPCs biosensors, respectively) toward NO was compared. In these cases, RGO, FeTCP, and FGPCs were drop-cast onto the pre-prepared RGO FET device, respectively. The response of the three different biosensors to NO is shown in Figure S4a. Taking the characteristic curve of PBS solution as the baseline, it was seen that the RGO/FGPCs sensor had the utmost offset of Dirac voltage when 1 μM NO was applied. Nevertheless, the RGO/RGO biosensor showed the negligible change with the same concentration of NO solutions because the RGO layer does not have catalytic properties to NO. Interestingly, the response of the RGO/FeTCP biosensor was smaller than that of the RGO/FGPCs sensor, which may be ascribed to the fact that the two-layer structure, RGO/FGPCs, has the better electrical performance than the single RGO/FeTCP layer. Figure S4b also shows the trend of Dirac voltage shift with the increasing concentrations of NO. The RGO/FGPCs sensor also displayed the greatest performance to NO when compared with the other two devices, which is in accordance with the former results. The two-layer structure, RGO/FGPCs, as the sensing channel, has played an amazingly synergistic effect toward detection of NO in selectivity and sensitivity.
Real-Time Monitoring of NO Released by Living Cells
To test the biological compatibility of the sensor, the proliferation of HUVECs cultured on the sensor surface was investigated. The cell proliferation behavior was researched by counting the number of HUVECs cultured for 4, 16, 24, and 48 h, respectively, until the cells covered almost all the sensor surface. Figure S5 shows that the cells were proliferated well and could totally cover the sensor region. The cell viability was then characterized by the bright-field live/dead cell markers, Trypan blue dye solution, after cells were cultured for up to 24 h. It was seen that cells were almost kept alive (Figure S5, parts e and f). In conclusion, the cells showed normal growth and viability when cultured on the sensor surface (Figure S5).
HUVECs are known to generate NO when stimulated by l-Arg. To test NO release, HUVECs were cultured for 10 h on the RGO/FGPCs FET biosensor surface, and then the culture medium was replaced with PBS followed by l-Arg stimulation. As shown in Figure 7a, the current declined gradually when l-Arg was introduced into the cells and then started to stabilize slowly in curve A. On the contrary, as illustrated in curve B, introduction of l-NAME, an endothelial NO synthase inhibitor, diminished this effect. Control experiments were conducted to verify that the decreasing current was caused by the NO release from HUVECs. As shown in curve C, when the same concentration of l-Arg was introduced without cells, no obvious current change was observed. In addition, to determine whether the as-prepared sensor could realize real-time monitoring of NO release at the single-cell level, the response of the FET sensor to different numbers of cells was studied. As shown in Figure 7b, the current decrease was obviously observed from the sensor surface, where there was only one cell growing inside the source-drain channel. Moreover, the current amplitude was raised with the increasing number of cells cultured on the sensor (Figure 7, parts c and d). This reveals that the higher concentration of NO was released and the stronger signals were obtained when more cells were grown inside the channel. The experiments demonstrate that the RGO/FGPCs FET biosensor could not only work well in complex biological systems with fast and sensitive response capability, but also realize the real-time monitoring of NO release at single-cell level.
Figure 7

Figure 7. Real-time monitoring of NO released from living cells. (a) Typical response of the RGO/FGPCs FET sensor at different conditions: A, stimulated by 3 mM l-Arg with cells; B, stimulated by 100 μM l-NAME + 3 mM l-Arg with cells; C, stimulated by 3 mM l-Arg without cells. (b–d) Real-time responses of the RGO/FGPCs FET sensor to NO sensor with different numbers of HUVECs cultured on the sensing surface (b, single cell; c, three cells; d, five cells). Scale bar: 20 μm (inset). The yellow dashed box shows the cells cultured inside the sensing channel.

Conclusion
In summary, we have constructed an ultrasensitive RGO/FGPCs FET biosensor capable of real-time monitoring of NO released from cultured human cells at single-cell level. Novel hybrid nanosheets, based on FGPCs and RGO, were formed between the FET sensing channel through π–π interactions, and the RGO/FGPCs FET sensor was then fabricated. Due to the remarkable synergistic effects of RGO and FGPCs, the biosensor thus enhanced superior conductivity and behaved with good catalytic properties, enabling highly sensitive and specific detection of NO. The detection limit was found to be 1 pM in PBS and 10 pM in the cell medium (S/N ≥ 3), which is the lowest compared to that reported in the literatures. The prepared sensor also showed good cytocompatibility for cell culture. The ultralow detection limit and good biocompatibility made the sensor suitable for real-time monitoring of NO at single-cell level. This method has great potentials for applications in clinical laboratory diagnostics.
Supporting Information
The Supporting Information is available free of charge on the ACS Publications website at DOI: 10.1021/acs.analchem.6b03208.

Optical images of RGO suspensions, photographs of FGPCs and GO after they were stored for 3 months at room temperature, photographs of the RGO/FGPCs FET biosensors with solution reservoir, EDS analysis of FGPCs on a silicon surface, the response of the various biosensors vs NO solution, the response of the various biosensors vs different NO solutions, microscopic images of HUVECs cultured on electrodes, and microscopic images of HUVECs cultured on FET for 24 h without Trypan blue dye solution or labeled with Trypan blue dye solution (PDF)
S-1
Supporting Information:
Real-Time Monitoring of Nitric Oxide at Single Cell Level with
Porphyrin-Functionalized Graphene Field Effect Transistor
Biosensor
Hui Xie 1
, Yu-Tao Li 1
, Yong-Min Lei1
, Meng-Meng Xiao2
, Yan-Lin Liu3
, Dai-Wen
Pang3
, Wei-Hua Huang3,*, Zhiyong Zhang2,*, Guo-Jun Zhang1,*
1
School of Laboratory Medicine, Hubei University of Chinese Medicine, 1 Huangjia
Lake West Road, Wuhan 430065, P.R. China
2
 Key Laboratory for the Physics and Chemistry of Nanodevices, Department of
Electronics, Peking University, No.5 Yiheyuan Road Haidian District, Beijing 100871,
P.R. China
3
Key Laboratory of Analytical Chemistry for Biology and Medicine (Ministry of Edu
cation), College of Chemistry and Molecular Sciences, Wuhan University,
Wuhan 430072, P.R.China
*
Corresponding author: Tel: +86-27-68890259, Fax: +86-27-68890259
E-mail: zhanggj@hbtcm.edu.cn; whhuang@whu.edu.cn; zyzhang@pku.edu.cn
Table of contents:
Figure S1. The optical images of RGO suspensions stored for 1 month, 3 months and
8 months, respectively.
Figure S2. (a) Photographs of (left) FGPCs and (right) GO after stored for 3 months at
room temperature, respectively. (b) Photographs of the FET device with a self-made
liquid reservoir.
Figure S3. X-ray Energy Dispersive Spectrum (EDS) analysis of FGPCs on silicon
wafer.
Figure S4. (a) The shift of Dirac point of the various biosensors (RGO/RGO,
RGO/FeTCP, RGO/FGPCs) versus NO solution (1 M). (b) The shift of Dirac point
of the various biosensors (RGO/RGO, RGO/FeTCP, RGO/FGPCs) versus series of
NO solution (1 nM ,10 nM, 100 nM, 1000 nM ).
Figure S5. (a)(b)(c)(d) Microscopic images of HUVECs cultured on electrodes for 4 h,
16 h, 24 h and 48 h, respectively. (e)(f) Microscopic images of HUVECs cultured on
electrodes for 24 h: (e) Without Trypan blue dye solution; (f) Labeled with Trypan
blue dye solution. Scale bar: 20 m.
S-2
Figure S1. The optical images of RGO suspensions stored for 1 month, 3 months and
8 months, respectively.
Figure S2. (a) Photographs of (left) FGPCs and (right) GO after stored for 3 months at
room temperature, respectively. (b) Photographs of the FET device with a self-made
liquid reservoir.
S-3
Figure S3. X-ray Energy Dispersive Spectrum (EDS) analysis of FGPCs on silicon
wafer.
Figure S4. (a) The shift of Dirac point of the various biosensors (RGO/RGO,
RGO/FeTCP, RGO/FGPCs) versus NO solution (1 M). (b) The shift of Dirac point
of the various biosensors (RGO/RGO, RGO/FeTCP, RGO/FGPCs) versus series of
NO solution (1 nM ,10 nM, 100 nM, 1000 nM ).
S-4
Figure S5. (a)(b)(c)(d) Microscopic images of HUVECs cultured on electrodes for 4 h,
16 h, 24 h and 48 h, respectively. (e)(f) Microscopic images of HUVECs cultured on
electrodes for 24 h: (e) Without Trypan blue dye solution; (f) Labeled with Trypan
blue dye solution. Scale bar: 20 m. 