We use essential cookies to make sure the site can function. We also use optional cookies for advertising, personalisation of content, usage analysis, and social media.

By accepting optional cookies, you consent to the processing of your personal data - including transfers to third parties. Some third parties are outside of the European Economic Area, with varying standards of data protection.

See ourprivacy policyfor more information on the use of your personal data.

Manage preferencesfor further information and to change your choices.

Advertisement

Access provided by Argonne Research Library

719Accesses

30Citations

Explore all metrics

In this paper, a new ultra-sensitive gas nanosensor based on an asymmetric dual-gate graphene nanoribbon field-effect transistor (ADG GNRFET) is proposed. The performance of the proposed gas nanosensor is examined using an atomistic quantum simulation based on the mode space non-equilibrium Green’s function approach, self-consistently coupled to a two-dimensional Poisson’s equation in the ballistic limit. The gas-induced change in work function of sensitive gates is considered as a sensing mechanism, where the threshold voltage shift is taken as a sensing metric. The sensitivity analysis has shown that the gas-induced shift in threshold voltage can be significantly increased by decreasing the ratio of top-oxide capacitance to that of back-oxide, to less than unity. Moreover, the length and width of graphene nanoribbon are found independent of sensor sensitivity. The possibility of reaching ultra-high sensitivities at the nanoscale domain using the proposed ADG GNRFET-based gas sensor makes it an exciting alternative to the conventional FET-based gas sensors.

Avoid common mistakes on your manuscript.

In today’s world, the gas sensors are indispensable devices in many fields due to dimensions of the information they provide [1]. The involvement of these devices in fundamental research of major areas increases the demand for new miniaturized and high-performance gas sensors [1,2]. The gas sensing based on field-effect transistor (FET) becomes increasingly attractive due to its interesting characteristics such as cost-effective, small size, high sensitivity, immediate and nondestructive readouts, low power consumption, easy calibration, CMOS compatibility, fast recovery, reasonable reproducibility, and high reliability [1,2,3]. The use of two-dimensional (2D) materials (e.g., graphene, transition metal dichalcogenides, molybdenum disulfide, etc.) as channel with direct interaction with targeted gases, for sensing very low gas concentration, is reported in many theoretical and experimental works, where unprecedented performances have been successfully achieved [4]. However, the behavior of such sensors is highly complicated due to the multiplicity of influential modulations induced by channel–gases interactions [4,5]. The FET-based gas sensor endowed of sensing gate can effectively avoid this issue, where only the work function modulation governs the sensing mechanism [1,6]. Due to the simplicity and efficiency of work function-modulated FET-based gas sensors, many experimental and theoretical researches have been focused on the development, optimization, and miniaturization of such gas sensors [2,6,7,8,9,10,11,12,13,14,15,16]. Most recent works on nanoscale FET-based gas sensor with sensing gate have used the subthreshold drain current as a main sensing parameter instead of the threshold voltage targeting the high sensitivity [13,14,15,16], because the sensitivity in terms of the threshold voltage shift provides the same magnitude of gas-induced change in gate flat-band voltage [11,14], and hence, a detection limit toward the low shift of gate work function induced by the low gas concentration is expected [11]. The operation of FET-based sensor in the subthreshold region exhibits the highest current response due to the small subthreshold swing [15,16], however, with an increase in noise, as it has already been shown [17]. In addition, the use of subthreshold drain current as sensing metric may require advanced acquisition circuitry for readout due to its very low values (between 10−12and 10−16amperes) [13,14,15,16], and therefore leading to an increase in the cost that is also a major concern [14]. Therefore, new sensor designs, materials, sensing metrics, and approaches, which capture and improve the sensitivity behavior and figure of merit of FET-based gas sensor, should be developed in order to give new impulses to the development of these sensors as well as to pave the way for the fabrication and industry.

In this paper, a new design of gas nanosensor based on asymmetric dual-gate graphene nanoribbon field-effect transistor (ADG GNRFET) is proposed through a quantum simulation-based study. The atomistic simulation is based on solving the Schrödinger equation using the mode space (MS) non-equilibrium Green’s function (NEGF) formalism self-consistently coupled with the 2D Poisson’s equation in the ballistic limits [18,19,20,21,22]. The threshold voltage shift is considered as a sensing metric. To the best of our knowledge, there are no works dealing with the optimization of the gas-induced threshold voltage shift in work function-modulated FET-based gas nanosensor neither experimentally nor computationally. The improved sensitivity of the proposed gas sensor is due to its operating strategy, which is based on asymmetric gate operation in conjunction with appropriate coupling capacitances that contribute electrostatically to the sensitivity amplification. Note that the armchair-edge graphene nanoribbon is used as a channel due to its very high sensitivity to its electrostatic medium [23,24], which includes the gas-induced change in work function of sensing gates. The obtained numerical results make the suggested design as a promising candidate for highly sensitive, nanometric-size, and reliable complementary metal-oxide-semiconductor (CMOS) gas sensor.

The paper is structured as follows. Section2presents in detail the nanosensor structure and operating principle. In Sect.3, we summarize the used quantum simulation approach, which is based on self-consistent solutions of the NEGF-Poisson couple. In Sect.4, we show and discuss the obtained simulation results. Finally, in Sect.5, the conclusions and important points will be presented.

Figure1a shows the side view of the proposed asymmetric dual-gate GNRFET-based gas nanosensor. The armchair-edge graphene nanoribbon, which is used as channel due to its ultra-high sensitivity to its electrostatic medium [23,24], is placed between two oxide layers. ThetOX-T(OX-B)andεT(εB) denote the thickness and relative dielectric constant of top (bottom) oxide, respectively. The AGNR channel with a lengthLCis intrinsic, and the source (drain) extension is taken heavilyn-type doped with a density of 10−2dopant per atom, and a lengthLS(D)of 10 nm. The number of carbon atom dimmer linesnis equal to 12, which agrees with a bandgap and a width of about 0.60 eV and 1.35 nm, respectively [25]. The two sensing gates are attached to the oxides under and over the intrinsic AGNR without any overlap with right and left reservoirs. Figure1b shows the top view of the proposed ADG GNRFET gas sensor, indicating that the source and drain extensions have the same width as the intrinsic GNR channel. The gate bias is not applied equally to both gates. The transport control is ensured by the top-gate, while the back-gate acts only as sensitive element. The conducting polymers [6,7,15,16] or catalytic metals [11,12,13,14] can be used as chemically sensitive gates for gas detection.

aLongitudinal cross section of the proposed asymmetric dual-gate GNRFET-based gas nanosensor.bTop view of ADG GNRFET

The gas sensing mechanism is well known, and it is based on the work function modulation of sensitive gates by the absorbed gases [6,7,8,9,10,11,12,13,14,15,16]. Note that the work function is the energy requisite to eject an electron from a solid surface [10]. The gas-induced change in work function of top and back sensing gates (ΔΦG) modulates the GNRFET electrostatics, and hence modulate the drain currentIDSand threshold voltageVTH, which are the commonly sensing metrics [6,7,8,9,10,11,12,13,14,15,16]. Therefore, by tracking the changes in these sensing parameters, we can attain the detection and monitoring of gases such as hydrogen, oxygen, chloroform, dichloromethane, and other vapors. Our new proposed design uses the asymmetric gate operation for the synergy of sensing gates in conjunction with an appropriate electrostatic gating in order to provide an ultra-high sensitivity in terms of threshold voltage shift, which is considered as a sensing metric in this work. The shift in threshold voltage is defined as∆VTH=VTH1−VTH0, whereVTH0(1)is the sensor threshold voltage at gate work functionΦG0(ΦG1) before (after) exposure to gas, noting that ΔΦG=ΦG1−ΦG0. It is worth indicating that the threshold voltage values are normally extracted fromIDS–VGStransfer characteristics using extrapolation in the linear region method, which is a commonly used technique [26].

This non-equilibrium Green’s function simulation approach is considered as a sound basis to investigate and predict the behavior of extremely downscaled transistors due to its ability to treat most of quantum transport features and electrostatic effects at deep submicron to atomistic scales [18,19]. The proposed ADG GNRFET-based gas nanosensor is simulated by self-consistently solving the Schrodinger equation using the NEGF formalism with a two-dimensional Poisson equation in the ballistic limit. Note that the ballistic transport is assumed due to the considered ultrascaled devices. The mode space representation is employed, and only the dominant modes in electronic transport are considered for the sake of computational efficiency [21,22]. A tight-binding Hamiltonian with only one orbital coupling (Pz) is used [16,20,21,22]. The two-dimensional Poisson’s equation is solved using the finite difference method assuming that the potential in the width direction is invariant [27,28,29,30]. The Dirichlet boundary condition is applied at the gates, where the gas-induced change in work function (ΔΦG) is included in effective flat-band voltage [13,14,15,16]. The remaining boundaries are set as Neumann boundary, where the electric field perpendicular to the concerned boundary is taken to be zero [21,22]. The drain current is computed after the achievement of self-consistency using the NEGF quantities within Landauer–Büttiker formula [20,21,22]. All simulations are carried out at room temperature (T= 300 K).

The simulator program is developed using MATLAB 7.2, and the simulations are performed on an Intel (R) core (TM) i7-3770 Processor (3.4 GHz) 8-GB-RAM computer operating under Windows 7. The accuracy and correctness of the simulator were checked for several GNRFET configurations (tunneling DG GNRFET, conventional DG GNRFET), as reported in our previous works [31,32]. In “Appendix,” we provide the details of the 2D Poisson-MS NEGF self-consistent approach with the relevant equations.

Figure2shows theIDS–VGStransfer characteristics, of the proposed ADG GNRFET-based gas nanosensor, before and after gas exposure. The value of gas-induced gate work function modulation is considered equal to 0.1 eV [14]. The dual-gate GNRFET-based gas sensor is simulated considering three different sensing configurations: a sensor with top sensing gate, a sensor with back sensing gate, and a sensor with top and back sensing gates. We can see that the use of top-gate as unique sensing element causes a shift in threshold voltage equal to 0.1 V, which corresponds to the change in gate work function (ΔVTH=ΔΦTG/q[11]) induced by the gas. However, the dual-gate GNRFET-based gas sensor with only back sensing gate provides an improved sensitivity. The sensitivity increase is due to the back-gate oxide capacitance, which is greater than the top-gate oxide capacitance leading to a significant impact of the reference back-gate (sensing element) on the transport control ensured by the top-gate. The latter can also be used as sensing gate in addition to the aforementioned sensing back-gate in order to provide a synergic response leading to another increase in sensitivity, as shown in the same figure.

TheIDS–VGStransfer characteristics of three different configurations of GNRFET-based gas sensors before and after exposure to gas

The sensitivity performance of the proposed dual-gate GNRFET with two sensing gates can be clearly understood by the behavior analysis of potential profile. As shown in Fig.3, the gas-induced gate work function modulation of ΔΦTG(BG)= 0.1 eV increases the potential profile leading to a decrease in charge density, and hence a decrease in the drain current, which explains the threshold voltage shift toward the positive direction as shown in Fig.2. Moreover, by increasing the top-gate bias responsible for control, the potential profile decreases slightly in comparison with the first potential profile increase, which is due to the gas-induced change in gate work function, despite the applied top-gate voltage being increased by 0.3 V. Equivalently, the potential profile is more sensitive to the variation of back-gate potential than that of the top-gate. This behavior can be explained by the significant electrostatic impact, of the gas-induced back-gate work function shift, due to the smallness of top-gate oxide capacitance compared to that of back-gate oxide (COX-T<COX-B). Therefore, a large shift in threshold voltage (sensitivity) is reachable.

Potential profiles of the proposed asymmetric dual sensing gate GNRFET-based gas sensor before and after gas-induced work function modulation

For optimization sake, we trace the sensor transfer characteristics while extracting the threshold voltage shift attributed to the gas-induced work function modulation for four different cases ofCT/CBcapacitance ratio, as shown in Fig.4. Inspecting all figures, we can clearly see that the decrease in the capacitance ratio improves the sensitivity in terms of threshold voltage change.

TheIDS–VGStransfer characteristics before and after the gas exposure for differentCT/CBcapacitance ratiosaCT/CB=0.5,bCT/CB=0.66,cCT/CB=1, anddCT/CB=1.33

In order to thoroughly analyze the sensitivity, we assess the threshold voltage shift as a function of modulation of back-gate capacitance in terms of change in its oxide thickness and dielectric constant, where a gas-induced work function change of ΔΦG= 0.1 eV is considered. Figure5a shows the sensitivity as a function of bottom-oxide thickness, noting that the simulated dual-gate GNRFET-based gas nanosensor with dual sensing gates and only single (back) sensing gate are working in asymmetric gate operation. As shown, their sensitivities increase by the decrease in the back-gate oxide thickness, and vice versa. The sensitivity improvement can also be explained by the rapprochement of the sensing back-gate and the sensitive AGNR channel, and hence, the gas-induced change in back-gate work function becomes more decisive in determining the threshold voltage. Figure5b shows the threshold voltage shift versus the dielectric constant of the back-gate oxideεB. As expected, the increase inεBimproves the sensitivity due to the increase in back-gate oxide capacitance that makes the impact of gas-induced change in back-gate work function on ballistic transport more dominant. As shown in the same figure, the maximization of back-gate oxide capacitance using both thinner back-oxide and high dielectric constants leads to an improved sensitivity.

aThreshold voltage shift versus bottom-oxide thickness for two sensing configurations of the proposed ADG GNRFET-based gas nanosensor.bChange in threshold voltage as a function of dielectric constant of bottom-oxide

Figure6plots the sensitivity versus the thickness of top-oxide considering the three different values of gas-induced change in work function of gates, which can be considered as three different gas concentrations [14]. As expected, by increasing thetOX-T, the electrostatic gating through the back-gate oxide capacitance becomes more impactful on ballistic transport, and therefore causing a large shift in threshold voltage.

Sensitivity in function of top-oxide thickness for three different values of gas-induced variation of gates’ work function

In Fig.7a, the sensitivity behavior is examined as a function of channel length. As shown, the shift in threshold voltage is insensitive to channel length for two different values of gas-induced change in work function of sensitive gates. Equivalently, the drain-induced barrier lowering has no effect on gas-induced threshold voltage shift. However, the electrical parameters of the FET-based gas sensor can be affected by short channel effects. The effect of change in AGNR width was also investigated, wheren= 3pfamily was considered, as shown in Fig.7b. It is clearly seen that the sensitivity is independent of dimmer number for two different values of gas-induced modulation of work function, indicating that the bandgap is not also an influential parameter on the sensitivity, but it can contribute significantly to the improvement in GNRFET electrical performance such as subthreshold swing, transconductance, conductance, on-current, off-current, and current ratio [30,33]. Since the sensitivity of the proposed GNRFET-based gas nanosensor is independent of length, width, and gap energy of AGNR, the nanosensor is expected to be able to have high sensitivity and high spatial resolution. Note that the dependence of gap energy to crystalline defects (such as edge roughness) can also be used to improve the electrical parameters of the proposed FET-based sensor [34].

aThreshold voltage shift versus channel length for two different values of gas-induced work function modulation.bSensitivity as a function of armchair GNR width consideringn=3pfamily for two different values of ΔΦTG(BG)

Considering the above sensitivity analysis (Figs.3–7), we conclude that the sensitivity optimization of the proposed asymmetric dual-gate GNRFET-based gas nanosensor is based on the minimization of the top-gate oxide capacitance to back-gate oxide capacitance (CT/CB) ratio, where very high sensitivity can be reached forCT/CBratio less than unity. This optimization strategy has important technological implications and shows that extremely high sensitivity in terms of threshold voltage shift can be achieved through implementation of very low (< 1)CTtoCBratio.

Based on the above sensitivity analysis, the proposed gas nanosensor with selected physical and dimensional parameters is simulated in gaseous environment, where the polyaniline (PANI) and poly-pyrrole-tetrafluoroborate (PPTFB) are considered as gate materials for sensing ammonia (NH3) and methanol (MeOH) vapors, respectively [15]. Note that the gas-induced change in work function of polymers can be expressed as [15]

whereKBis the Boltzmann constant,Tis the temperature,δis the fractional charge,Pis the partial pressure of the donor/acceptor gas,Piis pressure of background non-specific gases, andkiis selectivity coefficients. It is to note that the impact of non-specific background gases is considered via the term\(\sum\nolimits_{i} {k_{i} P_{i} }\), which is taken to be 10−11in both sensing cases [15].

Figure8a shows the work function modulation of PANI- and PPTFB-based gates in function of different NH3and CH3OH pressures, respectively. We can see that the shift of work function of polymers increases with the increase in gas pressure. Therefore, the threshold voltage shift is expected to increase with gas pressure increase. Figure8b shows the sensitivity in function of NH3and MeOH pressure for the conventional [16] and proposed GNRFET-based gas sensor. It is clearly seen that the proposed sensor provides a very high sensitivity toward the whole gas pressure range, where it exhibits sensitivity greater than that of conventional FET and GNRFET by about one order of magnitude. Moreover, it is also clear that the difference between the ammonia and methanol becomes well distinguishable in terms of sensitivity in ADG GNRFET case.

aWork function behavior of PANI- and PPTFB-based gate under different ammonia and methanol pressures, respectively.bSensitivity behavior of the conventional and proposed design toward a wide range of NH3and MeOH pressures

It is worth noting that the variation in temperature can affect the gas sensor performance by influencing the interaction between the gas and sensing gates on the one hand (Poisson equation) and the properties of GNR channel on the other hand (NEGF) [15]. It is worth indicating that the effect of many external environmental parameters (such as pressure, humidity, and temperature) is beyond the scope of this work and can be a matter for further studies.

From fabrication point of view, the flexibility of choosing an appropriate COX-T/COX-Bratio using thickness and permittivity engineering makes the elaboration of gas nanosensors based on the proposed design (even using another material as a channel), simple and feasible far from any constraint. In addition, the possibility of adjusting the initial work function of conducting polymer-based gates (tuning the selectivity to specific gas) makes the multi-gas sensing within reach [6,7,15]. The obtained results indicate that the proposed design can give new impulse to the gas sensing using the work function-modulated field-effect transistor.

In this work, based on the concept of gas-induced change in gate work function, we proposed a new high-performance gas nanosensor based on an asymmetric dual-gate graphene nanoribbon field-effect transistor. The investigation of the proposed nanosensor is based on a quantum simulation, which self-consistently solves the Schrödinger equation using the mode space NEGF formalism with the 2D Poisson’s equation in the ballistic limits. The sensitivity assessment has shown that the minimization ofCT/CBratio to less than unity using the variation of top-oxide thickness, back-oxide dielectric constant, and back-oxide thickness can lead to very high sensitivities toward gas-induced change in work function of sensing gates. Moreover, the length and width of AGNR channel were found independent of gas-induced shift in threshold voltage, indicating that the proposed nanosensor is anticipated to be able to have ultra-high sensitivity and high spatial resolution. With the merits of CMOS compatibility, small dimensionality, and high sensitivity, the proposed ADG GNRFET-based gas nanosensor could be a favorable candidate for a chip-based gas sensor.

Yamazoe, N.: Toward innovations of gas sensor technology. Sens. Actuators B Chem.108(1–2), 2–14 (2005)

ArticleGoogle Scholar

Wilson, D.M., Hoyt, S., Janata, J., Booksh, K., Obando, L.: Chemical sensors for portable, handheld field instruments. IEEE Sens. J.1(4), 256–274 (2001)

Liu, X., Cheng, S., Liu, H., Hu, S., Zhang, D., Ning, H.: A survey on gas sensing technology. Sensors12(7), 9635–9665 (2012)

Yang, S., Jiang, C., Wei, S.: Gas sensing in 2D materials. Appl. Phys. Rev.4(2), 021304 (2017)

Mao, S., Chang, J., Pu, H., Lu, G., He, Q., Zhang, H., Chen, J.: Two-dimensional nanomaterial-based field-effect transistors for chemical and biological sensing. Chem. Soc. Rev.46(22), 6872–6904 (2017)

Janata, J., Josowicz, M.: Conducting polymers in electronic chemical sensors. Nat. Mater.2(1), 19–24 (2003)

Janata, J., Josowicz, M.: Chemical modulation of work function as a transduction mechanism for chemical sensors. Acc. Chem. Res.31(5), 241–248 (1998)

Yamaguchi, T., Kiwa, T., Tsukada, K., Yokosawa, K.: Oxygen interference mechanism of platinum–FET hydrogen gas sensor. Sens. Actuators, A136(1), 244–248 (2007)

Bergveld, P., Hendrikse, J., Olthuis, W.: Theory and application of the material work function for chemical sensors based on the field effect principle. Meas. Sci. Technol.9(11), 1801–1808 (1998)

Sharma, B., Sharma, A., Kim, J.-S.: Recent advances on H2sensor technologies based on MOX and FET devices: a review. Sens. Actuators B Chem.262, 758–770 (2018)

Safari, M., Gholizadeh, M., Salehi, A.: Modeling and simulation of a MOSFET gas sensor with platinum gate for hydrogen gas detection. Sens. Actuators B Chem.141(1), 1–6 (2009)

Oprea, A., Bârsan, N., Weimar, U.: Work function changes in gas sensitive materials: fundamentals and applications. Sens. Actuators B Chem.142(2), 470–493 (2009)

Singh, N.K., Raman, A., Singh, S., Kumar, N.: A novel high mobility In1−xGaxAs cylindrical-gate-nanowire FET for gas sensing application with enhanced sensitivity. Superlattices Microstruct.111, 518–528 (2017)

Gautam, R., Saxena, M., Gupta, R.S., Gupta, M.: Gate-all-around nanowire MOSFET with catalytic metal gate for gas sensing applications. IEEE Trans. Nanotechnol.12(6), 939–944 (2013)

Sarkar, D., Gossner, H., Hansch, W., Banerjee, K.: Tunnel-field-effect-transistor based gas-sensor: introducing gas detection with a quantum-mechanical transducer. Appl. Phys. Lett.102(2), 023110 (2013)

Tamersit, K., Djeffal, F.: Double-gate graphene nanoribbon field-effect transistor for DNA and gas sensing applications: simulation study and sensitivity analysis. IEEE Sens. J.16(11), 4180–4191 (2016)

Lee, J., et al.: A highly responsive silicon nanowire/amplifier MOSFET hybrid biosensor. Sci. Rep.5(1), 12286 (2015)

Datta, S.: Nanoscale device modeling: the Green’s function method. Superlattices Microstruct.28(4), 253–278 (2000)

Xue, Y., Datta, S., Ratner, M.A.: First-principles based matrix Green’s function approach to molecular electronic devices: general formalism. Chem. Phys.281(2–3), 151–170 (2002)

Fiori, G., Iannaccone, G.: Multiscale modeling for graphene-based nanoscale transistors. Proc. IEEE101(7), 1653–1669 (2013)

Zhao, P., Guo, J.: Modeling edge effects in graphene nanoribbon field-effect transistors with real and mode space methods. J. Appl. Phys.105(3), 034503-1–034503-7 (2009)

Google Scholar

Yousefi, R., Shabani, M., Arjmandi, M., Ghoreishi, S.S.: A computational study on electrical characteristics of a novel band-to-band tunneling graphene nanoribbon FET. Superlattices Microstruct.60, 169–178 (2013)

Neto, A.H.C., Guinea, F., Peres, N.M.R., Novoselov, K.S., Geim, A.K.: The electronic properties of graphene. Rev. Mod. Phys.81(1), 109–162 (2009)

Chen, D., Tang, L., Li, J.: Graphene-based materials in electrochemistry. Chem. Soc. Rev.39(8), 3157–3180 (2010)

Son, Y.-W., Cohen, M.L., Louie, S.G.: Energy gaps in graphene nanoribbons. Phys. Rev. Lett.97(21), 216803-1–216803-4 (2006)

Ortiz-Conde, A., et al.: A review of recent MOSFET threshold voltage extraction methods. Microelectron. Reliab.42(4–5), 583–596 (2002)

Chen, W., Yin, W.-Y., Zhao, W.-S., Hao, R., Li, E., Kang, K., Guo, J.: Scaling analysis of high gain monolayer MoS2photodetector for its performance optimization. IEEE Trans. Electron Devices63(4), 1608–1614 (2016)

Rawat, B., Paily, R.: Modeling of graphene-based field-effect transistors through a 1-D real-space approach. J. Comput. Electron.17(1), 90–100 (2017)

Nazari, A., et al.: Modeling comparison of graphene nanoribbon field effect transistors with single vacancy defect. Superlattices Microstruct.97, 28–45 (2016)

Akbari Eshkalak, M., Anvarifard, M.K.: A novel graphene nanoribbon FET with an extra peak electric field (EFP-GNRFET) for enhancing the electrical performances. Phys. Lett. A381(16), 1379–1385 (2017)

Tamersit, K., Djeffal, F.: A novel graphene field-effect transistor for radiation sensing application with improved sensitivity: proposal and analysis. Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. A901, 32–39 (2018)

Tamersit, K.: Performance assessment of a new radiation dosimeter based on carbon nanotube field-effect transistor: a quantum simulation study. IEEE Sens. J.19(9), 3314–3321 (2019)

Ouyang, Y., Yoon, Y., Guo, J.: Scaling behaviors of graphene nanoribbon FETs: a three-dimensional quantum simulation study. IEEE Trans. Electron Devices54(9), 2223–2231 (2007)

Guo, J.: Modeling of graphene nanoribbon devices. Nanoscale4(18), 5538–5548 (2012)

Marin, E.G., et al.: Modeling of electron devices based on 2-D materials. IEEE Trans. Electron Devices65(10), 4167–4179 (2018)

Chin, S.-K., et al.: Device physics and characteristics of graphene nanoribbon tunneling FETs. IEEE Trans. Electron Devices57(11), 3144–3152 (2010)

Yan, Q., et al.: Intrinsic current–voltage characteristics of graphene nanoribbon transistors and effect of edge doping. Nano Lett.7(6), 1469–1473 (2018)

Ren, Z.: Nanoscale MOSFETs: Physics, Simulation and Design, Ph.D. dissertation, School Electrical Computer Engineering, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN, USA (2001)

Guo, J.: Carbon Nanotube Electronics: Modeling, Physics, and Applications, Ph.D. dissertation, Department of Electrical Engineering, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN, USA (2004)

Tamersit, K., Djeffal, F.: Boosting the performance of a nanoscale graphene nanoribbon field-effect transistor using graded gate engineering. J. Comput. Electron.17(3), 1276–1284 (2018)

Download references

Department of Electronics and Telecommunications, Université 8 Mai 1945 Guelma, Guelma, 24000, Algeria

Khalil Tamersit

You can also search for this author inPubMedGoogle Scholar

Correspondence toKhalil Tamersit.

Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

This appendix details the used quantum simulation, which is based on solving the Schrödinger equation using the mode space non-equilibrium Green’s function formalism self-consistently with a two-dimensional Poisson equation in the ballistic limits. Contrary to the drift-diffusion-based simulation, which is especially suitable to study transport in microscale devices as well as to compute the transport in diffusive regime, the NEGF-based simulation can rigorously treat the quantum effects and the atomistic scale features [35] leading to a good accordance with the experimental output characteristics of nanodevices [32,34]. The NEGF approach requires firstly the obtainment of the retarded Green’s function, which can be given by the following matrix form [18]

whereEis the energy,ηis an infinitesimally small positive number,Iis the identity matrix,His the Hamiltonian of the armchair-edge graphene nanoribbon [21], andΣSandΣDare the self-energies, which treat the coupling of the armchair GNR channel to the source and drain contacts, respectively. In the mode space formulation, the self-energy of the source (drain) for theqth mode is calculable analytically using the following explicit expression [21]

with

whereb1q(b2q),t0=2.7 eV, Δ = 0.12, andU1(M)are the hopping parameter between B–A (A–B) nearest neighboring carbon rings, the nearest neighbor tight-binding (TB) parameter, the edge bond relaxation parameter, and the electrostatic potential at the first (last) GNR column, which couples to the source (drain) contact, respectively. It is worth noting that the self-energy matrices own the same size as GNR Hamiltonian matrixM×M, whereMis the number of carbon columns in transport direction, noting that only (1, 1) element ofΣSand (M,M) element ofΣDare nonzero entries [16,22]. Using the obtained retarded Green’s function, the local density of states (LDOS) linked to the source (drain) injected states can be computed as [18]

whereG†is the Hermitian conjugate of the Green’s function andΓS(D)is the energy level broadening that is attributable to the source (drain) contact and it can be determined by [18]

The electron (hole) correlation functions can also be derived by the following equations [18,22]

whereΣIn(Out)denotes the in (out) scattering matrix, and it can be computed from

whereFS(D)is the source (drain) contact Fermi distribution. Based on the above NEGF equations, the charge density in the GNR channel can be computed as [21,33]

The calculation of mode space NEGF Eqs. (2–11) requires the on-site electrostatic potentialUi, which can be drawn from the solutions of the two-dimensional Poisson equation, which is given by [16]

whereU,q,ε, andρare the electrostatic potential, the electron charge magnitude, the dielectric constant, and the distribution of net charge density including the doping concentrations, respectively. Note that the thickness, relative permittivity, and work function of GNR are assumed to betGNR= 0.1 nm,ɛGNR=2.5, andWFGNR=4.58 eV, respectively [36,37]. The Poisson’s equation is conventionally solved in (x–z) coordinates using the finite difference method (FDM). Considering the five-point stencil, the Poisson’s Eq. (12) can be discretized as [27]

whereaandbare the spacing inx- andz-directions, respectively. At the interface of top and bottom different materials, the discontinuity of dielectric constants should be considered and the discretized form of (12) becomes [38]

whereεT(B)is the dielectric constant of the top (bottom) material of interface. In the gate contacts, the Dirichlet boundary condition is applied aseV=eVG+ΦGNR−ΦGS, whereVG,ΦGS, andΦGNRare the gate voltage and the work function of the sensing gate electrode and A-GNR, respectively. The Neumann boundary condition is applied to the remaining boundaries including theS/Dcontacts, where the electric field perpendicular to the boundary is assumed to be zero [16]. The obtained set of equations is solved for the potential by Newton–Raphson iteration [39]. It is to note that the finite element method (FEM) can also be used to solve (12) leading to the same results. However, the FDM approach provides more simplicity and facility of implementation [40].

As a brief view of NEGF simulation, starting from an initial guess for the on-site electrostatic potential, Eqs. (2–11) are solved and the resulting charge density updates (12) for obtaining new on-site electrostatic potentials which in turn will be inserted into the Hamiltonian matrix in (2). This cycle is repeated until the self-consistency is achieved [40]. After the convergence of the Poisson-NEGF loop, the channel current can be calculated using the Landauer–Büttiker formula given by [18,19,20,21]

wherehis Planck’s constant andT(E) is the transmission coefficient, which can be computed using the NEGF quantities as [16]

where Tr is the trace operator.

Reprints and permissions

Tamersit, K. An ultra-sensitive gas nanosensor based on asymmetric dual-gate graphene nanoribbon field-effect transistor: proposal and investigation.J Comput Electron18, 846–855 (2019). https://doi.org/10.1007/s10825-019-01349-9

Download citation

Published:24 May 2019

Issue Date:15 September 2019

DOI:https://doi.org/10.1007/s10825-019-01349-9

Anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:

Sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article.

Provided by the Springer Nature SharedIt content-sharing initiative

View in articleFull size image

146.137.70.67

Argonne Research Library (8200955775)  - Department of Energy DOE Labs (3000179256)  - Colorado Alliance of Research Libraries (8200982549)

© 2025 Springer Nature

AbstractIn this paper, a new ultra-sensitive gas nanosensor based on an asymmetric dual-gate graphene nanoribbon field-effect transistor (ADG GNRFET) is proposed. The performance of the proposed gas nanosensor is examined using an atomistic quantum simulation based on the mode space non-equilibrium Green’s function approach, self-consistently coupled to a two-dimensional Poisson’s equation in the ballistic limit. The gas-induced change in work function of sensitive gates is considered as a sensing mechanism, where the threshold voltage shift is taken as a sensing metric. The sensitivity analysis has shown that the gas-induced shift in threshold voltage can be significantly increased by decreasing the ratio of top-oxide capacitance to that of back-oxide, to less than unity. Moreover, the length and width of graphene nanoribbon are found independent of sensor sensitivity. The possibility of reaching ultra-high sensitivities at the nanoscale domain using the proposed ADG GNRFET-based gas sensor makes it an exciting alternative to the conventional FET-based gas sensors.Similar content being viewed by othersNanotransistor-based gas sensing with record-high sensitivity enabled by electron trapping effect in nanoparticlesArticleOpen access19 June 2024Adsorption Site of Gas Molecules on Defective Armchair Graphene Nanoribbon Formed Through Ion BombardmentArticle06 November 2017Gas adsorption effect on the graphene nanoribbon band structure and quantum capacitanceArticle16 June 2017Use our pre-submission checklistAvoid common mistakes on your manuscript.1IntroductionIn today’s world, the gas sensors are indispensable devices in many fields due to dimensions of the information they provide [1]. The involvement of these devices in fundamental research of major areas increases the demand for new miniaturized and high-performance gas sensors [1,2]. The gas sensing based on field-effect transistor (FET) becomes increasingly attractive due to its interesting characteristics such as cost-effective, small size, high sensitivity, immediate and nondestructive readouts, low power consumption, easy calibration, CMOS compatibility, fast recovery, reasonable reproducibility, and high reliability [1,2,3]. The use of two-dimensional (2D) materials (e.g., graphene, transition metal dichalcogenides, molybdenum disulfide, etc.) as channel with direct interaction with targeted gases, for sensing very low gas concentration, is reported in many theoretical and experimental works, where unprecedented performances have been successfully achieved [4]. However, the behavior of such sensors is highly complicated due to the multiplicity of influential modulations induced by channel–gases interactions [4,5]. The FET-based gas sensor endowed of sensing gate can effectively avoid this issue, where only the work function modulation governs the sensing mechanism [1,6]. Due to the simplicity and efficiency of work function-modulated FET-based gas sensors, many experimental and theoretical researches have been focused on the development, optimization, and miniaturization of such gas sensors [2,6,7,8,9,10,11,12,13,14,15,16]. Most recent works on nanoscale FET-based gas sensor with sensing gate have used the subthreshold drain current as a main sensing parameter instead of the threshold voltage targeting the high sensitivity [13,14,15,16], because the sensitivity in terms of the threshold voltage shift provides the same magnitude of gas-induced change in gate flat-band voltage [11,14], and hence, a detection limit toward the low shift of gate work function induced by the low gas concentration is expected [11]. The operation of FET-based sensor in the subthreshold region exhibits the highest current response due to the small subthreshold swing [15,16], however, with an increase in noise, as it has already been shown [17]. In addition, the use of subthreshold drain current as sensing metric may require advanced acquisition circuitry for readout due to its very low values (between 10−12and 10−16amperes) [13,14,15,16], and therefore leading to an increase in the cost that is also a major concern [14]. Therefore, new sensor designs, materials, sensing metrics, and approaches, which capture and improve the sensitivity behavior and figure of merit of FET-based gas sensor, should be developed in order to give new impulses to the development of these sensors as well as to pave the way for the fabrication and industry.In this paper, a new design of gas nanosensor based on asymmetric dual-gate graphene nanoribbon field-effect transistor (ADG GNRFET) is proposed through a quantum simulation-based study. The atomistic simulation is based on solving the Schrödinger equation using the mode space (MS) non-equilibrium Green’s function (NEGF) formalism self-consistently coupled with the 2D Poisson’s equation in the ballistic limits [18,19,20,21,22]. The threshold voltage shift is considered as a sensing metric. To the best of our knowledge, there are no works dealing with the optimization of the gas-induced threshold voltage shift in work function-modulated FET-based gas nanosensor neither experimentally nor computationally. The improved sensitivity of the proposed gas sensor is due to its operating strategy, which is based on asymmetric gate operation in conjunction with appropriate coupling capacitances that contribute electrostatically to the sensitivity amplification. Note that the armchair-edge graphene nanoribbon is used as a channel due to its very high sensitivity to its electrostatic medium [23,24], which includes the gas-induced change in work function of sensing gates. The obtained numerical results make the suggested design as a promising candidate for highly sensitive, nanometric-size, and reliable complementary metal-oxide-semiconductor (CMOS) gas sensor.The paper is structured as follows. Section2presents in detail the nanosensor structure and operating principle. In Sect.3, we summarize the used quantum simulation approach, which is based on self-consistent solutions of the NEGF-Poisson couple. In Sect.4, we show and discuss the obtained simulation results. Finally, in Sect.5, the conclusions and important points will be presented.2Nanosensor structure and sensing mechanismFigure1a shows the side view of the proposed asymmetric dual-gate GNRFET-based gas nanosensor. The armchair-edge graphene nanoribbon, which is used as channel due to its ultra-high sensitivity to its electrostatic medium [23,24], is placed between two oxide layers. ThetOX-T(OX-B)andεT(εB) denote the thickness and relative dielectric constant of top (bottom) oxide, respectively. The AGNR channel with a lengthLCis intrinsic, and the source (drain) extension is taken heavilyn-type doped with a density of 10−2dopant per atom, and a lengthLS(D)of 10 nm. The number of carbon atom dimmer linesnis equal to 12, which agrees with a bandgap and a width of about 0.60 eV and 1.35 nm, respectively [25]. The two sensing gates are attached to the oxides under and over the intrinsic AGNR without any overlap with right and left reservoirs. Figure1b shows the top view of the proposed ADG GNRFET gas sensor, indicating that the source and drain extensions have the same width as the intrinsic GNR channel. The gate bias is not applied equally to both gates. The transport control is ensured by the top-gate, while the back-gate acts only as sensitive element. The conducting polymers [6,7,15,16] or catalytic metals [11,12,13,14] can be used as chemically sensitive gates for gas detection.Fig. 1aLongitudinal cross section of the proposed asymmetric dual-gate GNRFET-based gas nanosensor.bTop view of ADG GNRFETFull size imageThe gas sensing mechanism is well known, and it is based on the work function modulation of sensitive gates by the absorbed gases [6,7,8,9,10,11,12,13,14,15,16]. Note that the work function is the energy requisite to eject an electron from a solid surface [10]. The gas-induced change in work function of top and back sensing gates (ΔΦG) modulates the GNRFET electrostatics, and hence modulate the drain currentIDSand threshold voltageVTH, which are the commonly sensing metrics [6,7,8,9,10,11,12,13,14,15,16]. Therefore, by tracking the changes in these sensing parameters, we can attain the detection and monitoring of gases such as hydrogen, oxygen, chloroform, dichloromethane, and other vapors. Our new proposed design uses the asymmetric gate operation for the synergy of sensing gates in conjunction with an appropriate electrostatic gating in order to provide an ultra-high sensitivity in terms of threshold voltage shift, which is considered as a sensing metric in this work. The shift in threshold voltage is defined as∆VTH=VTH1−VTH0, whereVTH0(1)is the sensor threshold voltage at gate work functionΦG0(ΦG1) before (after) exposure to gas, noting that ΔΦG=ΦG1−ΦG0. It is worth indicating that the threshold voltage values are normally extracted fromIDS–VGStransfer characteristics using extrapolation in the linear region method, which is a commonly used technique [26].3Quantum simulation approachThis non-equilibrium Green’s function simulation approach is considered as a sound basis to investigate and predict the behavior of extremely downscaled transistors due to its ability to treat most of quantum transport features and electrostatic effects at deep submicron to atomistic scales [18,19]. The proposed ADG GNRFET-based gas nanosensor is simulated by self-consistently solving the Schrodinger equation using the NEGF formalism with a two-dimensional Poisson equation in the ballistic limit. Note that the ballistic transport is assumed due to the considered ultrascaled devices. The mode space representation is employed, and only the dominant modes in electronic transport are considered for the sake of computational efficiency [21,22]. A tight-binding Hamiltonian with only one orbital coupling (Pz) is used [16,20,21,22]. The two-dimensional Poisson’s equation is solved using the finite difference method assuming that the potential in the width direction is invariant [27,28,29,30]. The Dirichlet boundary condition is applied at the gates, where the gas-induced change in work function (ΔΦG) is included in effective flat-band voltage [13,14,15,16]. The remaining boundaries are set as Neumann boundary, where the electric field perpendicular to the concerned boundary is taken to be zero [21,22]. The drain current is computed after the achievement of self-consistency using the NEGF quantities within Landauer–Büttiker formula [20,21,22]. All simulations are carried out at room temperature (T= 300 K).The simulator program is developed using MATLAB 7.2, and the simulations are performed on an Intel (R) core (TM) i7-3770 Processor (3.4 GHz) 8-GB-RAM computer operating under Windows 7. The accuracy and correctness of the simulator were checked for several GNRFET configurations (tunneling DG GNRFET, conventional DG GNRFET), as reported in our previous works [31,32]. In “Appendix,” we provide the details of the 2D Poisson-MS NEGF self-consistent approach with the relevant equations.4Numerical results and discussionFigure2shows theIDS–VGStransfer characteristics, of the proposed ADG GNRFET-based gas nanosensor, before and after gas exposure. The value of gas-induced gate work function modulation is considered equal to 0.1 eV [14]. The dual-gate GNRFET-based gas sensor is simulated considering three different sensing configurations: a sensor with top sensing gate, a sensor with back sensing gate, and a sensor with top and back sensing gates. We can see that the use of top-gate as unique sensing element causes a shift in threshold voltage equal to 0.1 V, which corresponds to the change in gate work function (ΔVTH=ΔΦTG/q[11]) induced by the gas. However, the dual-gate GNRFET-based gas sensor with only back sensing gate provides an improved sensitivity. The sensitivity increase is due to the back-gate oxide capacitance, which is greater than the top-gate oxide capacitance leading to a significant impact of the reference back-gate (sensing element) on the transport control ensured by the top-gate. The latter can also be used as sensing gate in addition to the aforementioned sensing back-gate in order to provide a synergic response leading to another increase in sensitivity, as shown in the same figure.Fig. 2TheIDS–VGStransfer characteristics of three different configurations of GNRFET-based gas sensors before and after exposure to gasFull size imageThe sensitivity performance of the proposed dual-gate GNRFET with two sensing gates can be clearly understood by the behavior analysis of potential profile. As shown in Fig.3, the gas-induced gate work function modulation of ΔΦTG(BG)= 0.1 eV increases the potential profile leading to a decrease in charge density, and hence a decrease in the drain current, which explains the threshold voltage shift toward the positive direction as shown in Fig.2. Moreover, by increasing the top-gate bias responsible for control, the potential profile decreases slightly in comparison with the first potential profile increase, which is due to the gas-induced change in gate work function, despite the applied top-gate voltage being increased by 0.3 V. Equivalently, the potential profile is more sensitive to the variation of back-gate potential than that of the top-gate. This behavior can be explained by the significant electrostatic impact, of the gas-induced back-gate work function shift, due to the smallness of top-gate oxide capacitance compared to that of back-gate oxide (COX-T<COX-B). Therefore, a large shift in threshold voltage (sensitivity) is reachable.Fig. 3Potential profiles of the proposed asymmetric dual sensing gate GNRFET-based gas sensor before and after gas-induced work function modulationFull size imageFor optimization sake, we trace the sensor transfer characteristics while extracting the threshold voltage shift attributed to the gas-induced work function modulation for four different cases ofCT/CBcapacitance ratio, as shown in Fig.4. Inspecting all figures, we can clearly see that the decrease in the capacitance ratio improves the sensitivity in terms of threshold voltage change.Fig. 4TheIDS–VGStransfer characteristics before and after the gas exposure for differentCT/CBcapacitance ratiosaCT/CB=0.5,bCT/CB=0.66,cCT/CB=1, anddCT/CB=1.33Full size imageIn order to thoroughly analyze the sensitivity, we assess the threshold voltage shift as a function of modulation of back-gate capacitance in terms of change in its oxide thickness and dielectric constant, where a gas-induced work function change of ΔΦG= 0.1 eV is considered. Figure5a shows the sensitivity as a function of bottom-oxide thickness, noting that the simulated dual-gate GNRFET-based gas nanosensor with dual sensing gates and only single (back) sensing gate are working in asymmetric gate operation. As shown, their sensitivities increase by the decrease in the back-gate oxide thickness, and vice versa. The sensitivity improvement can also be explained by the rapprochement of the sensing back-gate and the sensitive AGNR channel, and hence, the gas-induced change in back-gate work function becomes more decisive in determining the threshold voltage. Figure5b shows the threshold voltage shift versus the dielectric constant of the back-gate oxideεB. As expected, the increase inεBimproves the sensitivity due to the increase in back-gate oxide capacitance that makes the impact of gas-induced change in back-gate work function on ballistic transport more dominant. As shown in the same figure, the maximization of back-gate oxide capacitance using both thinner back-oxide and high dielectric constants leads to an improved sensitivity.Fig. 5aThreshold voltage shift versus bottom-oxide thickness for two sensing configurations of the proposed ADG GNRFET-based gas nanosensor.bChange in threshold voltage as a function of dielectric constant of bottom-oxideFull size imageFigure6plots the sensitivity versus the thickness of top-oxide considering the three different values of gas-induced change in work function of gates, which can be considered as three different gas concentrations [14]. As expected, by increasing thetOX-T, the electrostatic gating through the back-gate oxide capacitance becomes more impactful on ballistic transport, and therefore causing a large shift in threshold voltage.Fig. 6Sensitivity in function of top-oxide thickness for three different values of gas-induced variation of gates’ work functionFull size imageIn Fig.7a, the sensitivity behavior is examined as a function of channel length. As shown, the shift in threshold voltage is insensitive to channel length for two different values of gas-induced change in work function of sensitive gates. Equivalently, the drain-induced barrier lowering has no effect on gas-induced threshold voltage shift. However, the electrical parameters of the FET-based gas sensor can be affected by short channel effects. The effect of change in AGNR width was also investigated, wheren= 3pfamily was considered, as shown in Fig.7b. It is clearly seen that the sensitivity is independent of dimmer number for two different values of gas-induced modulation of work function, indicating that the bandgap is not also an influential parameter on the sensitivity, but it can contribute significantly to the improvement in GNRFET electrical performance such as subthreshold swing, transconductance, conductance, on-current, off-current, and current ratio [30,33]. Since the sensitivity of the proposed GNRFET-based gas nanosensor is independent of length, width, and gap energy of AGNR, the nanosensor is expected to be able to have high sensitivity and high spatial resolution. Note that the dependence of gap energy to crystalline defects (such as edge roughness) can also be used to improve the electrical parameters of the proposed FET-based sensor [34].Fig. 7aThreshold voltage shift versus channel length for two different values of gas-induced work function modulation.bSensitivity as a function of armchair GNR width consideringn=3pfamily for two different values of ΔΦTG(BG)Full size imageConsidering the above sensitivity analysis (Figs.3–7), we conclude that the sensitivity optimization of the proposed asymmetric dual-gate GNRFET-based gas nanosensor is based on the minimization of the top-gate oxide capacitance to back-gate oxide capacitance (CT/CB) ratio, where very high sensitivity can be reached forCT/CBratio less than unity. This optimization strategy has important technological implications and shows that extremely high sensitivity in terms of threshold voltage shift can be achieved through implementation of very low (< 1)CTtoCBratio.Based on the above sensitivity analysis, the proposed gas nanosensor with selected physical and dimensional parameters is simulated in gaseous environment, where the polyaniline (PANI) and poly-pyrrole-tetrafluoroborate (PPTFB) are considered as gate materials for sensing ammonia (NH3) and methanol (MeOH) vapors, respectively [15]. Note that the gas-induced change in work function of polymers can be expressed as [15]$$\Delta {\text{WF}}_{\text{CP}} = \frac{{K_{\text{B}} T}}{2\delta }\ln \left( {\frac{P}{{\sum\limits_{i} {k_{i} P_{i} } }} + 1} \right)$$(1)whereKBis the Boltzmann constant,Tis the temperature,δis the fractional charge,Pis the partial pressure of the donor/acceptor gas,Piis pressure of background non-specific gases, andkiis selectivity coefficients. It is to note that the impact of non-specific background gases is considered via the term\(\sum\nolimits_{i} {k_{i} P_{i} }\), which is taken to be 10−11in both sensing cases [15].Figure8a shows the work function modulation of PANI- and PPTFB-based gates in function of different NH3and CH3OH pressures, respectively. We can see that the shift of work function of polymers increases with the increase in gas pressure. Therefore, the threshold voltage shift is expected to increase with gas pressure increase. Figure8b shows the sensitivity in function of NH3and MeOH pressure for the conventional [16] and proposed GNRFET-based gas sensor. It is clearly seen that the proposed sensor provides a very high sensitivity toward the whole gas pressure range, where it exhibits sensitivity greater than that of conventional FET and GNRFET by about one order of magnitude. Moreover, it is also clear that the difference between the ammonia and methanol becomes well distinguishable in terms of sensitivity in ADG GNRFET case.Fig. 8aWork function behavior of PANI- and PPTFB-based gate under different ammonia and methanol pressures, respectively.bSensitivity behavior of the conventional and proposed design toward a wide range of NH3and MeOH pressuresFull size imageIt is worth noting that the variation in temperature can affect the gas sensor performance by influencing the interaction between the gas and sensing gates on the one hand (Poisson equation) and the properties of GNR channel on the other hand (NEGF) [15]. It is worth indicating that the effect of many external environmental parameters (such as pressure, humidity, and temperature) is beyond the scope of this work and can be a matter for further studies.From fabrication point of view, the flexibility of choosing an appropriate COX-T/COX-Bratio using thickness and permittivity engineering makes the elaboration of gas nanosensors based on the proposed design (even using another material as a channel), simple and feasible far from any constraint. In addition, the possibility of adjusting the initial work function of conducting polymer-based gates (tuning the selectivity to specific gas) makes the multi-gas sensing within reach [6,7,15]. The obtained results indicate that the proposed design can give new impulse to the gas sensing using the work function-modulated field-effect transistor.5ConclusionIn this work, based on the concept of gas-induced change in gate work function, we proposed a new high-performance gas nanosensor based on an asymmetric dual-gate graphene nanoribbon field-effect transistor. The investigation of the proposed nanosensor is based on a quantum simulation, which self-consistently solves the Schrödinger equation using the mode space NEGF formalism with the 2D Poisson’s equation in the ballistic limits. The sensitivity assessment has shown that the minimization ofCT/CBratio to less than unity using the variation of top-oxide thickness, back-oxide dielectric constant, and back-oxide thickness can lead to very high sensitivities toward gas-induced change in work function of sensing gates. Moreover, the length and width of AGNR channel were found independent of gas-induced shift in threshold voltage, indicating that the proposed nanosensor is anticipated to be able to have ultra-high sensitivity and high spatial resolution. With the merits of CMOS compatibility, small dimensionality, and high sensitivity, the proposed ADG GNRFET-based gas nanosensor could be a favorable candidate for a chip-based gas sensor.ReferencesYamazoe, N.: Toward innovations of gas sensor technology. Sens. Actuators B Chem.108(1–2), 2–14 (2005)ArticleGoogle ScholarWilson, D.M., Hoyt, S., Janata, J., Booksh, K., Obando, L.: Chemical sensors for portable, handheld field instruments. IEEE Sens. J.1(4), 256–274 (2001)ArticleGoogle ScholarLiu, X., Cheng, S., Liu, H., Hu, S., Zhang, D., Ning, H.: A survey on gas sensing technology. Sensors12(7), 9635–9665 (2012)ArticleGoogle ScholarYang, S., Jiang, C., Wei, S.: Gas sensing in 2D materials. Appl. Phys. Rev.4(2), 021304 (2017)ArticleGoogle ScholarMao, S., Chang, J., Pu, H., Lu, G., He, Q., Zhang, H., Chen, J.: Two-dimensional nanomaterial-based field-effect transistors for chemical and biological sensing. Chem. Soc. Rev.46(22), 6872–6904 (2017)ArticleGoogle ScholarJanata, J., Josowicz, M.: Conducting polymers in electronic chemical sensors. Nat. Mater.2(1), 19–24 (2003)ArticleGoogle ScholarJanata, J., Josowicz, M.: Chemical modulation of work function as a transduction mechanism for chemical sensors. Acc. Chem. Res.31(5), 241–248 (1998)ArticleGoogle ScholarYamaguchi, T., Kiwa, T., Tsukada, K., Yokosawa, K.: Oxygen interference mechanism of platinum–FET hydrogen gas sensor. Sens. Actuators, A136(1), 244–248 (2007)ArticleGoogle ScholarBergveld, P., Hendrikse, J., Olthuis, W.: Theory and application of the material work function for chemical sensors based on the field effect principle. Meas. Sci. Technol.9(11), 1801–1808 (1998)ArticleGoogle ScholarSharma, B., Sharma, A., Kim, J.-S.: Recent advances on H2sensor technologies based on MOX and FET devices: a review. Sens. Actuators B Chem.262, 758–770 (2018)ArticleGoogle ScholarSafari, M., Gholizadeh, M., Salehi, A.: Modeling and simulation of a MOSFET gas sensor with platinum gate for hydrogen gas detection. Sens. Actuators B Chem.141(1), 1–6 (2009)ArticleGoogle ScholarOprea, A., Bârsan, N., Weimar, U.: Work function changes in gas sensitive materials: fundamentals and applications. Sens. Actuators B Chem.142(2), 470–493 (2009)ArticleGoogle ScholarSingh, N.K., Raman, A., Singh, S., Kumar, N.: A novel high mobility In1−xGaxAs cylindrical-gate-nanowire FET for gas sensing application with enhanced sensitivity. Superlattices Microstruct.111, 518–528 (2017)ArticleGoogle ScholarGautam, R., Saxena, M., Gupta, R.S., Gupta, M.: Gate-all-around nanowire MOSFET with catalytic metal gate for gas sensing applications. IEEE Trans. Nanotechnol.12(6), 939–944 (2013)ArticleGoogle ScholarSarkar, D., Gossner, H., Hansch, W., Banerjee, K.: Tunnel-field-effect-transistor based gas-sensor: introducing gas detection with a quantum-mechanical transducer. Appl. Phys. Lett.102(2), 023110 (2013)ArticleGoogle ScholarTamersit, K., Djeffal, F.: Double-gate graphene nanoribbon field-effect transistor for DNA and gas sensing applications: simulation study and sensitivity analysis. IEEE Sens. J.16(11), 4180–4191 (2016)ArticleGoogle ScholarLee, J., et al.: A highly responsive silicon nanowire/amplifier MOSFET hybrid biosensor. Sci. Rep.5(1), 12286 (2015)ArticleGoogle ScholarDatta, S.: Nanoscale device modeling: the Green’s function method. Superlattices Microstruct.28(4), 253–278 (2000)ArticleGoogle ScholarXue, Y., Datta, S., Ratner, M.A.: First-principles based matrix Green’s function approach to molecular electronic devices: general formalism. Chem. Phys.281(2–3), 151–170 (2002)ArticleGoogle ScholarFiori, G., Iannaccone, G.: Multiscale modeling for graphene-based nanoscale transistors. Proc. IEEE101(7), 1653–1669 (2013)ArticleGoogle ScholarZhao, P., Guo, J.: Modeling edge effects in graphene nanoribbon field-effect transistors with real and mode space methods. J. Appl. Phys.105(3), 034503-1–034503-7 (2009)Google ScholarYousefi, R., Shabani, M., Arjmandi, M., Ghoreishi, S.S.: A computational study on electrical characteristics of a novel band-to-band tunneling graphene nanoribbon FET. Superlattices Microstruct.60, 169–178 (2013)ArticleGoogle ScholarNeto, A.H.C., Guinea, F., Peres, N.M.R., Novoselov, K.S., Geim, A.K.: The electronic properties of graphene. Rev. Mod. Phys.81(1), 109–162 (2009)ArticleGoogle ScholarChen, D., Tang, L., Li, J.: Graphene-based materials in electrochemistry. Chem. Soc. Rev.39(8), 3157–3180 (2010)ArticleGoogle ScholarSon, Y.-W., Cohen, M.L., Louie, S.G.: Energy gaps in graphene nanoribbons. Phys. Rev. Lett.97(21), 216803-1–216803-4 (2006)ArticleGoogle ScholarOrtiz-Conde, A., et al.: A review of recent MOSFET threshold voltage extraction methods. Microelectron. Reliab.42(4–5), 583–596 (2002)ArticleGoogle ScholarChen, W., Yin, W.-Y., Zhao, W.-S., Hao, R., Li, E., Kang, K., Guo, J.: Scaling analysis of high gain monolayer MoS2photodetector for its performance optimization. IEEE Trans. Electron Devices63(4), 1608–1614 (2016)ArticleGoogle ScholarRawat, B., Paily, R.: Modeling of graphene-based field-effect transistors through a 1-D real-space approach. J. Comput. Electron.17(1), 90–100 (2017)ArticleGoogle ScholarNazari, A., et al.: Modeling comparison of graphene nanoribbon field effect transistors with single vacancy defect. Superlattices Microstruct.97, 28–45 (2016)ArticleGoogle ScholarAkbari Eshkalak, M., Anvarifard, M.K.: A novel graphene nanoribbon FET with an extra peak electric field (EFP-GNRFET) for enhancing the electrical performances. Phys. Lett. A381(16), 1379–1385 (2017)ArticleGoogle ScholarTamersit, K., Djeffal, F.: A novel graphene field-effect transistor for radiation sensing application with improved sensitivity: proposal and analysis. Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. A901, 32–39 (2018)ArticleGoogle ScholarTamersit, K.: Performance assessment of a new radiation dosimeter based on carbon nanotube field-effect transistor: a quantum simulation study. IEEE Sens. J.19(9), 3314–3321 (2019)ArticleGoogle ScholarOuyang, Y., Yoon, Y., Guo, J.: Scaling behaviors of graphene nanoribbon FETs: a three-dimensional quantum simulation study. IEEE Trans. Electron Devices54(9), 2223–2231 (2007)ArticleGoogle ScholarGuo, J.: Modeling of graphene nanoribbon devices. Nanoscale4(18), 5538–5548 (2012)ArticleGoogle ScholarMarin, E.G., et al.: Modeling of electron devices based on 2-D materials. IEEE Trans. Electron Devices65(10), 4167–4179 (2018)ArticleGoogle ScholarChin, S.-K., et al.: Device physics and characteristics of graphene nanoribbon tunneling FETs. IEEE Trans. Electron Devices57(11), 3144–3152 (2010)ArticleGoogle ScholarYan, Q., et al.: Intrinsic current–voltage characteristics of graphene nanoribbon transistors and effect of edge doping. Nano Lett.7(6), 1469–1473 (2018)ArticleGoogle ScholarRen, Z.: Nanoscale MOSFETs: Physics, Simulation and Design, Ph.D. dissertation, School Electrical Computer Engineering, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN, USA (2001)Guo, J.: Carbon Nanotube Electronics: Modeling, Physics, and Applications, Ph.D. dissertation, Department of Electrical Engineering, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN, USA (2004)Tamersit, K., Djeffal, F.: Boosting the performance of a nanoscale graphene nanoribbon field-effect transistor using graded gate engineering. J. Comput. Electron.17(3), 1276–1284 (2018)ArticleGoogle ScholarDownload referencesAuthor informationAuthors and AffiliationsDepartment of Electronics and Telecommunications, Université 8 Mai 1945 Guelma, Guelma, 24000, AlgeriaKhalil TamersitAuthorsKhalil TamersitView author publicationsYou can also search for this author inPubMedGoogle ScholarCorresponding authorCorrespondence toKhalil Tamersit.Additional informationPublisher's NoteSpringer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.AppendixAppendixThis appendix details the used quantum simulation, which is based on solving the Schrödinger equation using the mode space non-equilibrium Green’s function formalism self-consistently with a two-dimensional Poisson equation in the ballistic limits. Contrary to the drift-diffusion-based simulation, which is especially suitable to study transport in microscale devices as well as to compute the transport in diffusive regime, the NEGF-based simulation can rigorously treat the quantum effects and the atomistic scale features [35] leading to a good accordance with the experimental output characteristics of nanodevices [32,34]. The NEGF approach requires firstly the obtainment of the retarded Green’s function, which can be given by the following matrix form [18]$$G(E) = [(E + i\eta )I - H - \varSigma_{\text{S}} - \varSigma_{\text{D}} ]^{ - 1}$$(2)whereEis the energy,ηis an infinitesimally small positive number,Iis the identity matrix,His the Hamiltonian of the armchair-edge graphene nanoribbon [21], andΣSandΣDare the self-energies, which treat the coupling of the armchair GNR channel to the source and drain contacts, respectively. In the mode space formulation, the self-energy of the source (drain) for theqth mode is calculable analytically using the following explicit expression [21]$$\varSigma_{Sq(Dq)} = \frac{{(E - U_{1(M)} )^{2} + b_{1q}^{2} - b_{2q}^{2} + \sqrt {[(E - U_{1(M)} )^{2} + b_{1q}^{2} - b_{2q}^{2} ]^{2} - 4(E - U_{1(M)} )^{2} b_{1q}^{2} } }}{{2(E - U_{1(M)} )}}$$(3)with$$b_{1q} = t_{0} + 4\Delta t_{0} \sin^{2} [q\pi /(n + 1)]/(n + 1)$$(4)$$b_{2q} = 2t_{0} \cos (\pi q/(n + 1)).$$(5)whereb1q(b2q),t0=2.7 eV, Δ = 0.12, andU1(M)are the hopping parameter between B–A (A–B) nearest neighboring carbon rings, the nearest neighbor tight-binding (TB) parameter, the edge bond relaxation parameter, and the electrostatic potential at the first (last) GNR column, which couples to the source (drain) contact, respectively. It is worth noting that the self-energy matrices own the same size as GNR Hamiltonian matrixM×M, whereMis the number of carbon columns in transport direction, noting that only (1, 1) element ofΣSand (M,M) element ofΣDare nonzero entries [16,22]. Using the obtained retarded Green’s function, the local density of states (LDOS) linked to the source (drain) injected states can be computed as [18]$$D_{{{{\rm S}}({\text{D}})}} = G\varGamma_{{{{\rm S}}({\text{D}})}} G^{{{\dag }}}$$(6)whereG†is the Hermitian conjugate of the Green’s function andΓS(D)is the energy level broadening that is attributable to the source (drain) contact and it can be determined by [18]$$\varGamma_{{{\text{S}}({\text{D}})}} = i(\varSigma_{{{\text{S}}({\text{D}})}} - \varSigma_{{{\text{S}}({\text{D}})}}^{{{\dag }}} )$$(7)The electron (hole) correlation functions can also be derived by the following equations [18,22]$$G^{n(p)} (E) = G{\sum}^{{{\text{In}}({\text{Out}})}} G^{{{\dag }}}$$(8)whereΣIn(Out)denotes the in (out) scattering matrix, and it can be computed from$${\sum}^{\text{In}} = \varGamma_{\text{S}} F_{\text{S}} + \varGamma_{\text{D}} F_{\text{D}}$$(9)$${\sum}^{\text{Out}} = \varGamma_{\text{S}} (1 - F_{\text{S}} ) + \varGamma_{\text{D}} (1 - F_{\text{D}} )$$(10)whereFS(D)is the source (drain) contact Fermi distribution. Based on the above NEGF equations, the charge density in the GNR channel can be computed as [21,33]$${\text{Ne}} = \int_{ - \infty }^{ + \infty } {{\text{d}}E\;\text{sgn} \left[ {E - E_{\text{N}} } \right]} \left\{ {D_{\text{S}} (E)} \right.f(\text{sgn} \left[ {E - E_{\text{N}} } \right](E - E_{\text{FS}} )) + D_{\text{D}} (E)f(\text{sgn} \left[ {E - E_{\text{N}} } \right](E - E_{\text{FD}} )\left. ) \right\}$$(11)The calculation of mode space NEGF Eqs. (2–11) requires the on-site electrostatic potentialUi, which can be drawn from the solutions of the two-dimensional Poisson equation, which is given by [16]$$\nabla^{2} U = \frac{ - q}{\varepsilon }\rho$$(12)whereU,q,ε, andρare the electrostatic potential, the electron charge magnitude, the dielectric constant, and the distribution of net charge density including the doping concentrations, respectively. Note that the thickness, relative permittivity, and work function of GNR are assumed to betGNR= 0.1 nm,ɛGNR=2.5, andWFGNR=4.58 eV, respectively [36,37]. The Poisson’s equation is conventionally solved in (x–z) coordinates using the finite difference method (FDM). Considering the five-point stencil, the Poisson’s Eq. (12) can be discretized as [27]$$\varepsilon \left[ {\frac{a}{b}U_{(i + 1,j)} + \frac{b}{a}U_{(i,j - 1)} - 2\left( {\frac{b}{a} + \frac{a}{b}} \right)U_{(i,j)} + \frac{b}{a}U_{(i,j + 1)} + \frac{a}{b}U_{(i - 1,j)} } \right] = - \frac{abq}{{\varepsilon_{0} }}\rho_{(i,j)}$$(13)whereaandbare the spacing inx- andz-directions, respectively. At the interface of top and bottom different materials, the discontinuity of dielectric constants should be considered and the discretized form of (12) becomes [38]$$\frac{a}{b}U_{(i + 1,j)} + \frac{b}{2a}\left( {1 + \frac{{\varepsilon_{\text{B}} }}{{\varepsilon_{\text{T}} }}} \right)U_{(i,j - 1)} - \left( {\frac{b}{a} + \frac{a}{b}} \right)\left( {1 + \frac{{\varepsilon_{\text{B}} }}{{\varepsilon_{\text{T}} }}} \right)U_{(i,j)} + \frac{b}{2a}\left( {1 + \frac{{\varepsilon_{\text{B}} }}{{\varepsilon_{\text{T}} }}} \right)U_{(i,j + 1)} + \frac{{a\varepsilon_{\text{B}} }}{{b\varepsilon_{\text{T}} }}U_{(i - 1,j)} = - \frac{abq}{{\varepsilon_{0} \varepsilon_{\text{T}} }}\rho_{(i,j)}$$(14)whereεT(B)is the dielectric constant of the top (bottom) material of interface. In the gate contacts, the Dirichlet boundary condition is applied aseV=eVG+ΦGNR−ΦGS, whereVG,ΦGS, andΦGNRare the gate voltage and the work function of the sensing gate electrode and A-GNR, respectively. The Neumann boundary condition is applied to the remaining boundaries including theS/Dcontacts, where the electric field perpendicular to the boundary is assumed to be zero [16]. The obtained set of equations is solved for the potential by Newton–Raphson iteration [39]. It is to note that the finite element method (FEM) can also be used to solve (12) leading to the same results. However, the FDM approach provides more simplicity and facility of implementation [40].As a brief view of NEGF simulation, starting from an initial guess for the on-site electrostatic potential, Eqs. (2–11) are solved and the resulting charge density updates (12) for obtaining new on-site electrostatic potentials which in turn will be inserted into the Hamiltonian matrix in (2). This cycle is repeated until the self-consistency is achieved [40]. After the convergence of the Poisson-NEGF loop, the channel current can be calculated using the Landauer–Büttiker formula given by [18,19,20,21]$$I = \frac{2q}{h}\int {{\text{d}}E\;T(E)} \left[ {f(E - E_{\text{FS}} ) - f(E - E_{\text{FD}} )} \right]$$(15)wherehis Planck’s constant andT(E) is the transmission coefficient, which can be computed using the NEGF quantities as [16]$$T(E) = {\text{Tr}}(\varGamma_{\text{S}} G\varGamma_{\text{D}} G^{{{\dag }}} )$$(16)where Tr is the trace operator.Rights and permissionsReprints and permissionsAbout this articleCite this articleTamersit, K. An ultra-sensitive gas nanosensor based on asymmetric dual-gate graphene nanoribbon field-effect transistor: proposal and investigation.J Comput Electron18, 846–855 (2019). https://doi.org/10.1007/s10825-019-01349-9Download citationPublished:24 May 2019Issue Date:15 September 2019DOI:https://doi.org/10.1007/s10825-019-01349-9Share this articleAnyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:Get shareable linkSorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article.Copy to clipboardProvided by the Springer Nature SharedIt content-sharing initiativeKeywordsGas nanosensorSensitive gatesGraphene nanoribbon field-effect transistor (GNRFET)NEGF simulationThreshold voltageWork functionSensitivity