Nanoporous Organic Field-Effect Transistors Employing a Calixarene Dielectric for Sub-ppb Gas Sensing
Jean-Nicolas Tisserant, Sebastian Beck, Marc-Michael Barf, Wolfgang Kowalsky, Robert Lovrincic
First published: 17 August 2018 https://doi.org/10.1002/aelm.201800362Citations: 15
SectionsPDFTools Share
Abstract
The increase of exposure to volatile organic compounds in general, and endocrine disruptors in particular, through daily healthcare consumer goods urgently calls for the development and commercialization of cheap and easy-to-use sensors to detect these molecules in air. Organic semiconductors (OSCs) promise the mass fabrication of cheap and flexible sensors, under the condition that the fabrication of functional thin films having the right morphology can be fully harnessed. Nanoporous morphologies are interesting in the field of gas sensing because they facilitate the diffusion of gas molecules to the active volume of organic field-effect transistors (OFETs), at the vicinity of the gate dielectric. Nanoporous films of OSCs are, however, challenging to produce and to transfer into working sensors. Usage of nanoporous OSC films deposited on a sensitive 4-tert-butylcalix[6]arene gate dielectric as the active layer of an OFET-based gas sensor is proposed here. The semiconducting molecules are self-assembled into nanoporous films at the interface between air and water, allowing their transfer to practically any gas-sensitive dielectric substrate. The OFET built on this film stack is used here to sense the presence of methyl 4-hydroxybenzoate (methylparaben) in air at concentrations below 1 ppb.

Recent evidence reveals a shift toward a dominant contribution of emissions originating from consumer goods in the amount and nature of volatile organic compounds (VOCs) present in urban areas.1 This shift calls for an increase in the surveillance of VOCs in indoor air and the urgent development of efficient, cheap, and reliable detectors for these molecules. Importantly for the fabrication of sensors, the optoelectronic properties of organic semiconductors (OSCs) can be modified by mild and reversible processes.2-4 Organic field–effect transistors (OFET) can be used to monitor these modifications for gas sensing applications.2, 5, 6 OFET-based gas sensors can be classified into direct sensors, where the modulation of the electric signal arises from the modification of the semiconductor itself, e.g., by the insertion of host molecules in the grain boundaries between OSC crystals,5, 7 or indirect sensors, where the modulation of the electric signal comes from the device configuration, e.g., by the addition of a sensing layer between the dielectric and the OSC.2, 8 Because charge transport and sensing occur mainly in the first few layers of molecules near the dielectric,9 the sensitivity of the sensor is often limited by the diffusion of the analyte to this region. Ways to tackle this issue are to reduce the thickness of the OSC layer,10 or to use nanoporous films.2, 7, 11, 12 Nanoporous films are particularly interesting, because they facilitate diffusion of the analyte,13 or of sensing dopants11 to the active area for direct sensing, and through an improved access to the sensing layer for indirect sensing.8 Methods to form nanoporous OSC films employ, e.g., polymeric particles,12 or polymeric templates as developed recently by the Diao group.7, 14 These templates require cross-linking prior to pattern transfer to the OSC using chlorinated solvents,7 making their specific chemical functionalization toward gas sensing challenging. In the approach that we follow here, nanoporous films of 6,13-bis(triisopropylsilylethynyl)pentacene (TIPS-Pn) were interfacially self-assembled on a water–air interface,15, 16 allowing facile deposition on a sensitive 4-tert-butylcalix[6]arene gate dielectric. Calixarenes are cyclic molecules allowing specific supramolecular interactions through molecular engineering of the functional moieties decorating the rims of the chalice.17, 18 They have been implemented in sensors based on quartz crystal microbalance,19 metallic chemiresistors.20

The OFET built on this film stack is used here for the first time to sense the presence of methyl 4-hydroxybenzoate (methylparaben) in air at concentrations below 1 ppb. Parabens are preservative agents massively used in household consumer goods. While they are alleged to act as endocrine disruptors,21 little attention has so far been paid to exposure to parabens through air,22 even though in a recent study they were found to be present above reporting limit of 1 ng m−3 (1.4 × 10−4 ppb) in air in a vast majority of households.23 In this respect, cheap transportable and easy-to-use OFET-based sensors for paraben molecules in air are urgently desirable.

Thin films of 6,13-bis(triisopropylsilylethynyl)pentacene (TIPS-Pn) were self-assembled at the interface between water and air (Figure 1a). The floating film formed within seconds is then deposited on any substrate by simple dip-coating. Figure 1b,c shows a scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and a scanning probe microscopy (SPM) image of nanoporous TIPS-Pn films deposited on Si/SiO2. SPM measurements on a 100 µm2 sample (Figure S1, Supporting Information) revealed a mean height of TIPS-Pn domains of 7.6 nm, an average film coverage of 58.2%, and a root mean square (RMS) roughness of 4.3 nm. The mean area per pore was 11.4 × 103 nm2, corresponding to a mean pore diameter of 121 nm and a median pore diameter of 38 nm, if considering disc-shaped pores. Importantly for their implementation in devices, the film percolation is not lost by deposition on metallic electrodes (Figure S2, Supporting Information). In the first set of experiments, we proved that these films can be implemented as active material in working transistors. Their perfomance was optimized with respect to the solution concentration and to the orientation of the TIPS-Pn film on the substrate (Figures S3 and S4, Supporting Information).

Details are in the caption following the image
Figure 1
Open in figure viewer
PowerPoint
Solution-processed nanoporous films of TIPS-Pn used in OFETs. a) Sketch of the fabrication method. b) SEM images of a film (0.25 g L−1 TIPS-Pn in CHCl3) deposited on Si/SiO2. c) SPM image with height distribution as inset (0.5 g L−1 TIPS-Pn in CHCl3), d) transfer and e) output characteristics of a bottom gate bottom contact OFET obtained using a nanoporous film (0.5 g L−1 Tips-Pn in CHCl3) on a 4-tert-butylcalix[6]arene Si/SiO2 dielectric layer.
The sensing dielectric layer used in this study, 4-tert-butylcalix[6]arene was spin-coated from chloroform,24 to reach homogeneous films with a thickness of 50 ± 2 nm. The characteristics of transistors fabricated on this dielectric were comparable to those observed on pure Si/SiO2. It was found that charge injection in the nanoporous film and device reproducibility was improved by using a top-contact configuration. The characteristics of a bottom gate, top contact transistor based on a 4-tert-butylcalix[6]arene dielectric layer are shown in Figure 1d (transfer curves) and Figure 1e (output curves). The leakage current and the square root of ID as a function of VG are shown in Figure S5 in the Supporting Information. From this data, a hole mobility of 1.5 × 10−3 cm2 Vs−1 and an on/off ratio of 2.4 × 105 were extracted. This performance proved to be sufficient for application in gas sensors as shown in the following on the example of methylparaben as guest analyte. The access of the guest molecule to the sensing calixarene layer is granted by the nanoporous nature of our TIPS-Pn film combined with its low thickness (below 10 nm).

A sideview SEM image through the sensor stack is shown in Figure 2a, along with the chemical structures of 4-tert-butylcalix[6]arene and methylparaben molecules. This combination of host–guest is used here for the first time. The cyclic variation of the drain current of a transistor based on nanoporous TIPS-Pn on calixarene as a function of the exposure to air, and air saturated with methylparaben, is shown in Figure 2b. While the drain current decreases linearly in air as already observed for similar systems,25 the presence of methylparaben in air hinders this current decay and improves the film conductivity. A plot of the drain current over time upon injection of paraben in the measuring chamber filled with air is shown in Figure S6 in the Supporting Information. A stress test carried out in air under constant gate and source-drain biases shows a linear decay of the current (Figure S7, Supporting Information), providing a stable baseline for gas sensing measurements. The increase in current reached 60% within 10 min on average over three substrates. The process observed takes place within hundreds of seconds, suggesting slow adsorption/desorption of gas molecules on the surface. The sensors respond to different amounts of paraben as shown in Figure 2c. From previoulsy published data, we have evaluated the vapor pressure of methyl paraben in air at room temperature.26, 27 The value obtained for the vapor pressure of methylparaben is in the order of 20 ppb (Figure S8, Supporting Information). As an estimation, we obtain a detection limit as low as 2% of the vapor pressure at room temperature, ≈0.3 ppb. It is noteworthy that, to the best of our knowledge, no paraben sensors other than based on gas chromatography28 were reported to detect methylparaben in air. The selectivity of OFET-based gas sensors is a known issue,29 that is usually solved best by including unit sensors in sensing matrixes called “artificial noses”.30 We show in Figure S9 in the Supporting Information that our unit calixarene-based sensors show a clear selectivity between phenolic methylparaben and ethanol in air. This selectivity comes from the absence of binding between ethanol and our dielectric layer as proven by infrared (IR) measurements in Figure S9 in the Supporting Information.

Details are in the caption following the image
Figure 2
Open in figure viewer
PowerPoint
Paraben sensing in air. a) Device structure illustrated by an SEM sideview image and the molecular structures of methylparaben (top) and 4-tert-butylcalix[6]arene (bottom), b) measurement of the drain current of a bottom gate top contact transistor based on nanoporous TIPS-Pn upon cyclic exposure to methylparaben in air, and air, c) influence of paraben concentration on the drain current.
The behavior of the sensors based on 4-tert-butylcalix[6]arene was compared upon exposure to different gas atmospheres. Figure 3a shows the behavior of such a sensor when exposed to paraben in air, and to air. As observed earlier, the drain current increases in the presence of paraben and decreases in the presence of air alone. The effect of TIPS-Pn pore size on the sensing ability of calixarene-based OFET sensors is shown in Figure S7 in the Supporting Information where the sensing ability of a microporous film obtained at a concentration of 10 g L−1 was compared to that of a nanoporous film obtained at 0.5 g L−1. The microporous film responded five times less on average compared to the nanoporous film, proving that the nanoporous morphology allowing access of the analyte to the dielectric plays an important role for sensing. Figure 3b shows the behavior of a sensor based on 4-tert-butylcalix[6]arene as dielectric in the presence of nitrogen alone and paraben in nitrogen. The film conductivity decreased upon exposure to nitrogen, increased in the presence of paraben in nitrogen, and slightly increased when replacing nitrogen by air. As a control experiment, the same measurement was carried out on Si/SiO2 as dielectric layer. In this case, a consistent increase in the current was observed for both nitrogen and paraben in nitrogen (Figure S11, Supporting Information), proving that the specific sensing behavior originated from the calixarene layer. The three adsorption–desorption equilibria involved in the measurements of Figures 2 and 3 and Figure S6 in the Supporting Information are summarized in Figure 3c.

Details are in the caption following the image
Figure 3
Open in figure viewer
PowerPoint
Comparison of methylparaben sensing in air and in nitrogen; error bars represent the standard deviation for at least three substrates. a) [air] to [paraben in air] and back, reference (blue) measured on Si/SiO2 as dielectric, b) [air] to [N2] and [air] to [paraben in N2]. c) Summary of the host–guest equilibria probed in (a) and (b). d) Relative IR spectra of 4-tert-butylcalix[6]arene after exposure to [paraben in air] (dark red), and after subsequent exposure to N2 (light red), showing the adsorption and desorption of methylparaben. e) Relative IR spectra of 4-tert-butylcalix[6]arene stored in N2 (dark blue), and stored in air (light blue) showing the adsorption and desorption of water.
IR spectroscopy was used to prove that these equilibria took place. The adsorption and desorption of methylparaben as well as water on calixarene films are shown in Figure 3d and e, respectively. The differential spectrum of the methylparaben-treated sample (dark red) clearly shows additional absorption bands at 1097, 1165, and 1275 cm−1 which are characteristic for methylparaben (see Figures S12 and S13, Supporting Information) proving an adsorption of methylparaben molecules onto the calixarene layer. By subsequent purging of the samples with N2 (light red), a decrease of the calixarene modes can be observed, revealing methylparaben desorption. Similar observations can be made for the desorption and adsorption of water. For the spectra of the sample purged with nitrogen, (dark blue) a very weak negative absorption feature around 3250 cm−1 can be observed. After storage in air (light blue) a corresponding positive absorption at the same position with almost the same intensity was measured.

The slow desorption of water observed under nitrogen, as well as its replacement with small aromatic compounds is coherent with what was described in the literature for similar calixarenes.31 From the variation of current observed, we conclude that the empty calixarene yields the lowest current flowing through the OSC film, followed by the water-bound calixarene and that the methylparaben-bound calixarene yields the highest current flowing through the OSC film.

We reproducibly observed an increase of the drain current upon exposure to methylparaben, a decrease in the presence of air, and an even more pronounced decrease of the drain current in the presence of nitrogen. Our hypothesis to explain this phenomenon is that charge trapping occurs in our transistor in a tunable way, depending on the guest molecule present in the calixarene cavity. Due to the nanoporous morphology of the film, the active area of the transistor at the vicinity of the dielectric remains accessible to the guest molecule and the energetic depth of charge carrier traps can be modulated by the presence of different guest molecules. To test this hypothesis, we compared the transfer characteristics of a transistor using calixarene as a dielectric, first measured in air and second measured in air saturated with methylparaben; see Figure S14, in the Supporting Information. The threshold voltage was decreased by ≈7 V and the hysteresis between increasing and decreasing gate bias sweeps was divided by two upon exposure to paraben. The shift in the threshold voltage can be attributed to charge trapping at the interface, retarding the formation of the conductive channel, or degradation.32 The hysteresis itself has multiple origins that are often not independent from one another33 and it was already discussed in the literature in terms of hole traps in the case of TIPS-pentacene.34 To further understand the sensing behavior, we compared the photo response of a nanoporous transistor using either Si/SiO2 or calixarene as a dielectric. The results are shown in Figure S14 in the Supporting Information. It is known that TIPS-Pn OFETs behave as phototransistors, in which the number of free charge carriers can be modulated by light.35, 36 It can be assumed that, averaged over the number of samples (at least three each), the number of photoexcited charge carriers should be similar in the two device configurations, because the film morphology is the same. It is clear, however, that the number of free charge carriers is drastically reduced when calixarene is used as dielectric, suggesting a stronger charge trapping in these films compared to Si/SiO2. A sketch of the possible position of the traps in the energy diagram of the TIPS-Pn transistor is shown in Figure S14 in the Supporting Information. Calixarene molecules can act as deeper or shallower traps for holes depending on the guest molecule bound to them. The bare calixarene allowing the lowest TIPS-Pn conductivity possesses a HOMO level (T3) very close to the HOMO of TIPS-Pn, providing numerous traps at the vicinity of the confined hole transport pathways. The paraben-bound calixarene allowing the highest TIPS-Pn conductivity possesses a HOMO level (T2) inaccessible to holes transported in the ground state. The native water-bound calixarene is an intermediate case between the two first in terms of trap levels (T1).

In summary, we have used an OFET sensor–based nanoporous thin films of TIPS-Pn and a calixarene dielectric for the detection of methylparaben vapors in air. The fabrication method allows depositing our film on any substrate that is not water-soluble by dip-coating. The performance of the OFETs reproducibly and reversibly increased in the presence of methylparaben, reaching on average a 60% increase in drain current within 10 min. This current increase could be reversed upon methylparaben removal. The limit of detection for methylparaben in air was evaluated to be below 1 ppb with a reponse time below 1 min. We believe that the ability shown here to deposit a nanoporous OSC thin film on a sensing dielectric opens countless new possibilites for OFET-based gas sensing. Future work includes the use of chemically designed calixarenes to target other analytes and employing a sensor matrix to gain in selectivity.

Experimental Section
Nanoporous TIPS-Pn thin films were formed by adapting an interfacial growth method published elsewhere.15 Briefly, TIPS-Pn was dissolved in chloroform at concentrations varying from 0.1 to 10 g L−1. One hundred and fifty microliters of the solution were deposited on the meniscus formed by DI water in a teflon beaker (ø = 2.5 cm). The film was transferred by dip-coating and dried on a hotplate for 1 h at 100 °C. Bottom gate top contact transistors using 4-tert-butylcalix[6]arene as dielectric were prepared in heavily doped silicon substrates having 200 nm of thermally grown SiO2. The substrates were cleaned in acetone and isopropanol (10 min each), dried and spin-coated at 2300 rpm with a 10 g L−1 solution of 4-tert-butylcalix[6]arene in chloroform. The film thickness measured by profilometer was 50 ± 5 nm. Gold contacts were deposited by thermal evaporation (P < 5 × 10−6 mbar, rate < 0.1 nm s−1). Transistors (50 µm channel length) were measured in a taylor-made gas chamber allowing to inject nitrogen, air, or mixtures of nitrogen or air with methylparaben (Alfa Aesar). Ethanol was injected into the chamber by letting air bubble through ethanol prior to injection in the chamber. To estimate the gas concentration in the chamber, given volumes of air were injected through methylparaben powder contained in a 2 L glass bottle having a gas output connected to the measuring chamber. For long-term measurement under gas atmosphere, and to limit device degradation, the gate bias was modulated37 using 1 s pulses at VG = –45 V separated by 9 s at VG = 0 V, the S-D bias was kept constant at VS-D = –30 V, the measurement time was set to 80 µs. For optical characterization, 4-tert-butylcalix[6]arene were spin-coated onto intrinsic silicon wafers with native oxide. IR spectra of differently treated 4-tert-butylcalix[6]arene layers were measured in varying surroundings (air or N2) utilizing a Fourier-transform IR spectrometer (Bruker Vertex 80v).

Supporting Information for Adv. Electron. Mater., DOI: 10.1002/aelm.201800362 Nanoporous Organic Field-Effect Transistors Employing a Calixarene Dielectric for Sub-ppb Gas Sensing Jean-Nicolas Tisserant,* Sebastian Beck, Marc-Michael Barf, Wolfgang Kowalsky, and Robert Lovrincic*Copyright WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, 69469 Weinheim, Germany, 2016. Supporting Information  Nanoporous Organic Field-Effect Transistors Employing a Calixarene Dielectric for Subppb Gas Sensing Jean-Nicolas Tisserant,* Sebastian Beck, Marc-Michael Barf, Wolfgang Kowalsky, Robert Lovrincic* Dr. J.-N. Tisserant, M.-M. Barf, Prof. Dr.-Ing. W. Kowalsky, Dr. R. Lovrincic Braunschweig University of Technology, Institute for High Frequency Technology, Schleinitzstraße 22, D-38106 Braunschweig, Germany InnovationLab Heidelberg, Speyererstraße 4, D-69115 Heidelberg, Germany E-mail: j.tisserant@tu-braunschweig.de; r.lovrincic@tu-braunschweig.de Dr. S. Beck University of Heidelberg, Kirchhoff Institute for Physics, Im Neuenheimer Feld 227, D-69120 Heidelberg, Germany InnovationLab Heidelberg, Speyererstraße 4, D-69115 Heidelberg, Germany Detailed Experimental Methods Bottom gate bottom contact transistors using SiO2 (230 nm, thermally grown on Si) as dielectric were prepared on pre-patterned Au (S-D) substrates provided by the Fraunhofer Institute for Photonic Microsystems (IPMS). The substrates were cleaned for 5 min in acetone and 2x 5 min in isopropanol, and dried under nitrogen flow prior to film deposition. In order to compare different exposure conditions with one another, only transistors having the following characteristics were used for gas sensing: an on/off ratio of at least 103 and a gate leakage current smaller than the drain current by at least a factor 102. Transistors fabricated from different substrates were compared as follows: the transistors were operated for 10 min under constant evironmental conditions (e.g. gas composition, light) and the behavior of the last 200 s before a change in these conditions was linearly fitted and subtracted as a baseline from the raw data. The data presented in Figures 2, 3 and 4 are expressed as percentage change of the drain current relative to the current measured at the moment of the environmental change (ON state of the transistor in all cases). Gas injection was done at 5 l/min, except for the sensor calibration, where a fixed volume of gas (10 mL) was injected several times consecutively. Measurement under illumination were done using white neon light (Osram L 38 W/840), and compared to measurements in our closed metallic chamber. IR measurements near normal transmittance (angle of incidence 7°) were carried out using a deuterated-triglycine-sulfate (DTGS) detector, a spectral resolution of 4 cm-1 and a spot size of the unpolarized IR beam of 2 mm. For each sample spectrum, at least 2000 scans were averaged and a spectrum of the bare silicon substrate was always used as reference. Figure S1. SPM characterization of a film obtained using a 0.5 g/L solution of TIPS-Pn in CHCl3. (a) SEM overview of the film, an area with fissures in the film was chosen to make the film boundaries visible. The largest observed grains without such defects is of the order of mm2, (b) SPM image of a 100 µm2 nanoporous film surface, (c) magnification of (b), (d) single profile line following the red line shown in (c).  Figure S2. SEM image of a film obtained using a 0.5 g/L solution of TIPS-Pn in CHCl3, deposited between two gold electrodes (Fraunhofer substrate). Figure S3. Statistics on bottom gate bottom contact transitors on Si/SiO2 as dielectric. (a) influence of the solution concentration on the OFETs ON/OFF ratio, (b) influence of the film orientation on the OFETs ON/OFF ratio. Box plots represent 10-90 percentiles, minimum, maximum and average values for transistors measured on at least 5 independent substrates. Figure S4. Influence of the concentration of TIPS-Pn in chloroform on the nanoporous film morphology. SEM images were taken at 3 different magnifications for 10 mg/mL, 1.0 mg/mL, 0.5 mg/mL, 0.25 mg/mL, respectively from top to bottom. Note the different scale for the top-left image. Note to S3 and S4: A maximum in the device performace was found for a concentration between 0.5 and 1.0 g/L. Figure S4, Supporting Information shows a matrix of SEM images of nanoporous films obtained at different solution concentrations. Films obtained above 5 g/L in chloroform have a polycrystalline structure with domains in the micrometer range and films obtained below 0.5 g/L show optimal nanoporous morphologies with pores in the range of 50 nm but tend to loose the long range percolation necessary for device function at the lowest concentration (0.1 g/L). The orientation of the film with respect to the substrate has an important influence on the device performance and astonishingly, devices fabricted with the surface in contact with water touching the electrodes outperformed those fabricated with the surface in contact with air by over two orders of magnitude in terms of on/off ratio. Transistors for sensing were therefore fabricated using 0.5 g/L solutions contacted on the side of the film previously in contact with water (see methods). Figure S5. Data used to extract the hole mobility of a nanoporous thin film transistor. (a) Plot of the square root of ID as a function of VG,  (b) leakage current compared to drain current. Figure S6. Variation of the drain current over time upon first exposure to methylparaben.  Figure S7. Long-term stress test in air under constant gate (-45 V) and source-drain biases (30 V) showing a linear decay of the current. The gate voltage was pulsed at 0.1 Hz as described in the experimental part. Figure S8. Vapor pressure of methylparaben as a function of temperature, data extracted from literature,[1,2] according to the following ln(P[Pa])=(34.3±0.3)−(11889±92)/T, r=0.9997 fitting function for methylparaben:[2]  Figure S9. (a) Comparison of the response of the sensor to vapors of methylparaben (black circles), and ethanol (red circles) in air. (b) Relative IR transmission spectra of 4-tert-butylcalix[6]arene as cast (black), stored in saturated ethanol + N2 (red). The differential spectrum obtained by dividing the red by the black spectrum is given in the bottom graph. No characteristic absorption bands of ethanol[3] between 900 cm-1 and 1200 cm-1 can be observed even for 24 hours. Figure S10. Comparison of the drain current response to paraben for two extreme film morphologies, error bars in the figure represent the standard deviation measured on at least n=3 independent substrates. (a) change in the drain current as a function of time for a nanoporous (black) and a microporous (red) TIPS-Pn film obtained using a 0.5 g/L and a 10 g/L solution in CHCl3, respectively; (b)(c) SEM images of TIPS-Pn films obtained using a 0.5 g/L in CHCl3, and a 10 g/L solution in CHCl3, respectively. Figure S11.  Control experiment measured on Si/SiO2. Response of the OFET upon exposure to paraben saturated in nitrogen (red), to nitrogen alone (black), to air after exposure to nitrogen (blue). Error bars in the figure represent the standard deviation measured on at least 3 independent substrates.  relative transmission relative transmission DFT  Experiment C-H O-H 1000 1% 800 1200 1400 1600 wavenumber [cm-1] 3000 3500 4000Figure S12. DFT calculated (red) and experimental (black) relative IR transmission spectra of a 66 nm thick calixarene layer on silicon. The C-H and O-H stretching vibrations are labeled in both spectra. 0.5% in air in paraben + air in N2 rel. transmission 0.1% DFT calculation 700 800 900 1000 1100 1200 1300 1400 1500 1600 wavenumber [cm-1] Figure S13. Relative IR transmission spectra of 4-tert-butylcalix[6]arene as cast (black), stored in paraben + air (dark red), and subsequently stored in N2 (light red) showing the adsorption and desorption of methylparaben. The differential spectra, obtained by dividing each spectrum by the previous one, given in the middle graph show characteristic absorption bands at 1097 cm-1, 1165 cm-1, and 1275 cm-1. These bands can be assigned to vibrational modes of the methylparaben molecule computed using density functional theory calculations (B3LYP/6-311G[d,p]) and shown in the lower graph in blue. Figure S14. Origin of the current modulation in 4-tert-butylcalix[6]arene based OFET sensors, error bars in the figure represent the standard deviation measured on at least 3 independent substrates. (a) Normalized transfer characteristics of transistors using 4-tert-butylcalix[6]arene as dielectric, in air (black) and air saturated with paraben (red), (b) effect of illumination (see methods) on the drain current for Si/SiO2 (black) and 4-tert-butylcalix[6]arene (red), as respective dielectric, (c) energy levels model consistent with the observed change in conductivity, left: operation of a trap-free TIPS-Pn transistor in the ON state, right: operation of the same transistor in the presence of dielectric-induced charge traps (T1, T2, T3: HOMO level of water-bound, paraben-bound, and empty calixarene, repectively). The curves were normalized to the ON-current value to focus on the changes in the shape of the IV characteristics without considering the change in current discussed previously.  In a recent review by the Sariciftci group, it was summarized that the hysteresis could originate from charge trapping at the dielectric/semiconductor interface, charge injection from the semiconductor into the dielectric, slow reaction of mobile charge carriers, mobile ions in the semiconductor or in the dielectric, polarization of the dielectric, or charge injection from the gate into the dielectric.[4]  In the present system, we can exclude a difference of charge injection from the gate into the dielectric because Si/SiO2 is present between the gate and the calixarene layer in all experiments. The appearance of mobile ions upon exposure to methylparaben is also unlikely. The remaining possibilities are a polarization of the dielectric which is possible if we consider the guest exchange described earlier, the trapping of charges at the semiconductor/dielectric interface and the injection of charges from the semiconductor to the dielectric. [1] [2] [3] [4] K. Chatterjee, D. Dollimore, K. Alexander, Int. J. Pharm. 2001, 213, 31. G. L. Perlovich, S. V. Rodionov, A. Bauer-Brandl, Eur. J. Pharm. Sci. 2005, 24, 25. E. E. Fileti, M. A. Castro, S. Canuto, Chem. Phys. Lett. 2008, 452, 54. M. Egginger, S. Bauer, R. Schwödiauer, H. Neugebauer, N. S. Sariciftci, Org. Electron. physics, Mater. Appl. 2017, 140, 4004. 