Click the pair button to affiliate your institution with your personal account

OR SEARCH CITATIONS

Your access to this publication has been provided byLearn More

Received

Accepted

Published

In this paper, we proposed to enhance a signal-to-noise (S/N) ratio for detecting a primary stress marker, serotonin, using a potentiometric biosensor modified by a well-designed nanofilter film. An extended-Au-gate field-effect transistor (EG-Au-gate FET) biosensor exhibits highly sensitive electrochemical detection toward various small biomolecules, including serotonin. Therefore, to enhance the S/N ratio for the serotonin detection, we designed an appropriate nanofilter film on the Au electrode by combining the aryldiazonium salt reduction strategy and boronate affinity. That is, only serotonin can approach the Au sensing surface to generate an electrical signal; interfering biomolecules are prevented from penetrating through the nanofilter, either because large interfering biomolecules cannot permeate through the highly dense, nanoporous multilayer film, or because phenylboronic acids included in the nanofilter captures small interfering biomolecules (e.g., catecholamines). The potentiometric biosensor modified by such a nanofilter film detected serotonin in a model sample solution containing catecholamines, cortisol, and human serum albumin with a high S/N ratio for the serotonin levels in the blood. Furthermore, we found that the effect of the nanofilter directly reflects the binding affinity of the receptors such as phenylboronic acids included in the nanofilter; thus, the selectivity and dynamic range of small target biomolecules can be tuned freely by designing the appropriate receptors for the nanofilter. The results show that a well-designed nanofilter biointerface can be a versatile biosensing platform for point-of-care testing, particularly for a simple stress check.

This publication is licensed under the terms of your
                            institutional subscription.Request reuse permissions.

Article subjects are automatically applied from the ACS Subject Taxonomy and describe the scientific concepts and themes of the article.

Article keywords are supplied by the authors and highlight key terms and topics
                        of the paper.

Figure 1. (A) Molecular structures of small-biomolecule stress biomarkers, namely, serotonin, norepinephrine, dopamine, epinephrine, and cortisol. (B) Schematic of the nanofilter-modified extended-Au-gate field-effect transistor (EG-Au-gate FET) biosensor. (C) Development of the nanofilter interface on the Au substrate.

Figure 2. Changes in the surface potential of the sensors modified by nanofilters with (diamonds) and without (circles) PBA vs the analyte concentration on a logarithmic scale. (A) Serotonin (N= 2), (B) norepinephrine (N= 4), (C) dopamine (N= 4), (D) epinephrine (N= 6), and (E) cortisol. Error bars represent the standard error determined from the number of experiments shown for each analyte. The experiments were performed for each analyte using different electrodes with the number of experiments shown. The calibration curve is based on the Langmuir isotherm equation, as described in theSupporting Information.

Figure 3. (A) Percent suppression of the change in the surface potential for the sensor modified with the nanofilter with PBA relative to the sensor without PBA. The values were calculated using the average change in the surface potential at 31.6 nM for individual experiments with different samples. The left bar indicates ΔVoutof 100% for serotonin hydrochloride (SE), NE, EP, or dopamine hydrochloride (DA), which was obtained using the nanofilter without PBS (note that the standard deviations at 100% were 27, 20, 14, and 6% for SE, NE, EP, and DA, respectively). n.s., not significant, **P< 0.05 vs 100% change in the surface potential at 31.6 nM. The error bars indicate the standard deviation in percentage. The number of experiments is the same as the numbers inFigure2. (B) Performance of the sensor modified with the nanofilter with PBA to serotonin against norepinephrine, epinephrine, and dopamine. Percentage of ΔVoutrepresents the sensor response to catecholamines at 10 nM relative to the response to serotonin at 100 nM. The values were calculated using the average change in the surface potential (number of experiments shown inFigure2) for individual experiments with different samples. ***P< 0.005 vs 100% (ΔVoutserotonin at 100 nM /ΔVoutserotonin at 100 nM). The number of experiments is the same as the numbers inFigure2.

Figure 4. (A) Adhesion isotherm analysis of the response of the nanofilter-modified sensor to added catecholamines. (B) Relative amounts of serotonin and catecholamines that reached the Au electrode after passing through the nanofilter with PBA against those that reached the Au electrode after passing through the aryl-derivative multilayer without PBA at various concentrations. These results indicate the ratio ofCc,freetoCc[(Cc,free/Cc) × 100%], which is defined in theSupporting Information(see the section Isotherm analysis of the sensor response, in the Supporting Informationp. S9). Also, this rate was calculated as the ratio of ΔVoutwith PBAobtained using the FET sensor with PBA to ΔVoutwithout PBAobtained using the FET sensor without PBA (ΔVoutwith PBA/ΔVoutwithout PBA) × 100%, from the data obtained inFigure2.

Figure 5. Normalized response of the sensor with (diamonds) and without (circles) PBA vs the serotonin concentration in a model sample solution containing 7.1 nM norepinephrine, 0.48 nM dopamine, 3.1 nM epinephrine, 1.7 μM cortisol, and 0.1 mg/mL HSA. Data were normalized by the following equation: ΔVnorm= (ΔVout– ΔVblank)/ΔVblank. Error bars represent the standard error of the two distinct experiments.

The Supporting Information is available free of charge athttps://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acsami.9b19309.

Electrochemical grafting and reduction of the nitrobenzene multilayer film on the Au electrode (Figure S1); surface characterization of the multilayer-grafted film on the Au electrode using AFM (Figure S2); specific suppression of nonspecific electrical signals from large biomolecules using the multilayer-functionalized EG-Au-FET biosensor (Figure S3); reduction of the nitrophenyl multilayer before or after pre-treatment with PBA (Figure S4); real-time serotonin detection using a nanofilter-coated sensor (Figure S5); effect of a nanofilter with PBA on an electrical signal at each concentration (Figure S6); impedance analysis of the aryl-derivative multilayer with and without PBA (Figure S7); impedimetric parameters in the resistance–capacitance (RC) circuit of the modified Au electrodes (Table S1) (PDF)

Enhancement
of Signal-to-Noise Ratio for Serotonin Detection with Well-Designed
Nanofilter-Coated Potentiometric Electrochemical Biosensor

84views

0shares

0downloads

Most electronic Supporting Information files are available without a subscription to ACS Web Editions. Such files may be downloaded by article for research use (if there is a public use license linked to the relevant article, that license may permit other uses). Permission may be obtained from ACS for other uses through requests via the RightsLink permission system:http://pubs.acs.org/page/copyright/permissions.html.

This study was partly supported by the Mirai Program of Japan Science and Technology (JST). We would like to thank Professors M. Nakao and K. Nishi and Dr. M. Hagio of IoT Media Laboratory, the University of Tokyo, for their help and useful discussions.

This article references
            36 other publications.

This article is cited by 42 publications.

Article Views are the COUNTER-compliant sum of full text article downloads since November 2008 (both PDF and HTML) across all institutions and individuals. These metrics are regularly updated to reflect usage leading up to the last few days.

Citations are the number of other articles citing this article, calculated by Crossref and updated daily.Find more information about Crossref citation counts.

The Altmetric Attention Score is a quantitative measure of the attention that a research article has received online. Clicking on the donut icon will load a page at altmetric.com with additional details about the score and the social media presence for the given article. Find more information onthe Altmetric Attention Score and how the score is calculated.

Please be aware that pubs.acs.org is undergoing maintenance from Saturday February 1 to Monday Febraury 3, that may have an impact on your experience. During this time, you may not be able to access certain features like login, purchasing single articles, saving searches or running existing saved searches, modifying your e-Alert preferences, or accessing Librarian administrative functions. We appreciate your patience as we continue to improve the ACS Publications platform.

Recent studies have shown that psychological stress may not only depress people’s mood in daily life but also increase the risk of developing severe mental and physical health issues such as depression(1,2)and cancer.(3)In daily life, we can often recognize stress on our own but cannot quantify the amount of exposure to stress because it is a cognitive phenomenon, which makes it difficult to decide the seriousness of the condition. On the other hand, recent progress in biomedical science has identified an increasing number of biomolecules that can be markers of stress exposure. Therefore, the development of biosensors that can quantitatively measure stress markers in our bodily fluids, such as blood, urine, saliva, sweat, and tears, will have a significant impact on the field of medical diagnosis.

The release of neurotransmitters by the nervous system(4,5)and hormones by the endocrine system(6)is one of the essential reactions of our body to stress exposure. Therefore, the primary stress markers include small-biomolecule neurotransmitters and hormones. For example, the expression of the small-biomolecule neurotransmitter serotonin (Figure1A) correlates with mood regulation and is a promising biomarker for depression.(7)Furthermore, blood serotonin levels correlate to some extent with the development of neuroendocrine tumors.(8)Because serotonin, as well as other neurotransmitters, such as dopamine, norepinephrine (NE), and epinephrine (EP), is produced by oxidative metabolism, electrochemical methods, which enable the detection of redox reactions, it has been widely used to develop biosensors for the detection of small-biomolecule stress markers. In fact, the serotonergic responses to stress in humans were discussed in previous studies.(9,10)For instance, serotonin, dopamine, or simultaneous dopamine and serotonin biosensors were developed using electrochemical methodologies.(11−14)Electrochemical methods are advantageous over other methods such as colorimetric or fluorescence assay because electrochemical detection does not require any extra labeling and can operate in a real-time manner.(15)Moreover, the sensor can be miniaturized to develop easy-to-use and low cost, point-of-use devices.(16)However, it is often difficult for electrochemical methods to achieve high selectivity to the target biomolecule, particularly in the case of small-biomolecule stress markers, because the oxidation potentials of the target small biomolecules are very similar, and it is often difficult to differentiate their electrical signals.(17)

In this regard, we have recently proposed a field-effect transistor (FET) biosensor with a polymeric nanofilter biointerface for quantitative small-biomolecule recognition with a high signal-to-noise (S/N) ratio.(18)Solution-gate FETs have been receiving increasing attention in the field of potentiometric biosensor technology owing to their high sensitivity toward changes in gate electrode/electrolyte interfacial potential.(16,19,20)We have also shown that extended-Au-gate FETs (EG-Au-FETs) exhibit potentially high detection sensitivity toward various electrochemically active small biomolecules; the Au surface potential changes with the catalytic electrochemical oxidation of the biomolecules owing to the highly electromotive Au surface (Figure1B, right).(21,22)Therefore, we designed and developed the polymeric nanofilter biointerface directly on the Au sensing surface to enhance the filtering effect, where the interfering biomolecules are prevented from approaching the Au sensing surface, and only the target small biomolecules can approach and react with the Au sensing surface, generating an electrical signal with a high S/N ratio. As a result, the polymeric nanofilter-coated FET sensor successfully differentiated the electrical signals of two small biomolecules,l-3,4-dihydroxyphenylalanine (l-DOPA) andl-cysteine.(18)

In this study, we designed and developed a nanofilter biointerface for improving the S/N ratio of the serotonin detection. We demonstrated that the use of a multilayer nanofilter film grafted via aryldiazonium salt chemistry could specifically suppress the nonspecific electrical signal generated by the adhesion of large biomolecules to the Au surface. Moreover, the S/N ratio for the detection of serotonin was enhanced by including phenylboronic acid (PBA) in the nanofilter as a receptor to capture interfering small-biomolecule stress markers. Using the nanofilter-modified EG-Au-FET, we demonstrated the quantitative determination of serotonin with a high S/N ratio in the concentration level of blood serotonin in a model sample solution containing similarly structured catecholamines, cortisol, and human serum albumin (HSA). The result was characterized by adhesion isotherm analysis, which showed that the strategy could be widely applied to the detection of various small-biomolecule biomarkers.

In the EG-FET sensor used in this study, the change in the potential at the extended-gate electrode/electrolyte solution interface, which is induced by electrochemical reactions such as equilibrium reactions or nonspecific adsorptions accompanied by changes in molecular charges and redox reactions, causes the change in the conductance of the semiconductor layer on the basis of the field effect. When the extended-gate electrode surface is covered by insulative oxide films (e.g., SiO2, Ta2O5) with hydroxy groups at the surface, the change in the interfacial potential between an electrolyte solution and an oxide film surface resulted from the change in ionic charges based on the equilibrium reaction between hydroxy groups and hydrogen ions. On the other hand, when a catalytically active electrode such as a Au film is used as the extended-gate electrode, redox reactions may occur, which cause the change in the surface potential. In this case, measurement using the EG-FET sensor works similarly to potentiometric, open-circuit potential (OCP) measurement in the electrochemical setup as no current flows through the circuit. In this study, the electrochemical oxidation of serotonin on the Au electrode causes a change in the surface potential, that is, the sensing mechanism is based on the detection of the electrochemical reaction at the Au gate electrode, which is output as the change in the surface potential by the FET. Moreover, measurement using the FET is advantageous over OCP measurement using an electrochemical cell because in the former case, transistors can be miniaturized and arrayed to realize multitarget biosensing in the future, the readout of which can amplify the change in the OCP.

To differentiate serotonin from the other interfering stress biomarkers, we designed the nanofilter biointerface using the following strategies. First, large interfering biomolecules, such as proteins, are prevented from approaching and adhering to the Au sensing surface, thus suppressing nonspecific electrical signals. Therefore, the nanofilter was designed to have a nanoporous structure with a sufficiently high density to prevent large biomolecules from penetrating but at the same time having sufficient spaces for small biomolecules to freely approach the Au sensing surface. Second, the nanofilter captures the interfering small biomolecules before they approach the Au sensing surface, and only the target biomolecule, serotonin, can approach the Au sensing surface, which then electrochemically reacts with the highly active Au electrode, generating the specific change in the surface potential of the Au electrode (Figure1B).

In this regard, the aryldiazonium salt reduction strategy and boronate affinity were combined to design the nanofilter biointerface. Aryldiazonium salt chemistry is a universal method for surface functionalization on various materials, where the reduction of the aryldiazonium salt produces the corresponding phenyl radicals, leading to the formation of a robust, covalently bound multilayer film through continuous radical reactions.(23,24)In contrast to monolayer films (e.g., self-assembled monolayers), multilayer films will not fully occupy the substrate surface because of steric hindrance, despite their high density, and so only small biomolecules can access the Au surface by penetrating through the narrow spaces between the building block molecules of the multilayer films. The EG-Au-FET biosensor modified by the multilayer film based on the aryldiazonium salt, which was a hydroxyl group at the para-substituent of the benzene ring, suppressed the nonspecific electrical signal generated by the adhesion of proteins to the Au electrode.(18)In this study, a nitrobenzene multilayer was chosen to functionalize the Au surface owing to its commercial availability, ease of use, and wide applicability to further surface functionalization by reducing the nitrophenyl group to the aminophenyl group. Practically, the formation of the nitrophenyl multilayer film and the reduction to the aminophenyl group can be both carried out with a simple electrochemical setup (Figure1C). Boronate affinity has been extensively used to recognize various biomolecules such as catecholamines(25,26)and saccharides(27−29)owing to its ability to induce pH-triggered reversible binding with cis-diol structures. In this study, the use of boronate affinity introduces the filtering effect to the nanofilter to prevent interfering small biomolecules (i.e., dopamine, norepinephrine, and epinephrine) from penetrating through the nanofilter membrane. That is, the nanofilter can recognize the structural differences between serotonin and catecholamines, where the former has a single hydroxyl group and the latter has two hydroxyl groups on the benzene ring (Figure1A). Therefore, the interfering small-biomolecule stress biomarkers, mainly the three catecholamines, bind phenylboronic acid (PBA) in the nanofilter before approaching the Au sensing surface, thus suppressing the nonspecific electrical signal, leading to the enhancement of S/N ratios for serotonin recognition. Since the EG-Au-FET is sensitive to biomolecules with high electrochemical activity, the addition of cortisol is expected to have a negligible effect on the sensor response, in contrast to the addition of catecholamines.

The electrochemical grafting of the nitrobenzene multilayer was confirmed by the two distinct reductive current peaks on the cyclic voltammogram (seeFigure S1Ain the Supporting Information). The density of the grafted multilayer film was calculated from the reduction of the nitrophenyl group to the aminophenyl group in the multilayer film using the relationship derived in theSupporting Information. The grafted film had a density of 12.7 molecules/nm2and a thickness of 7 nm, as characterized by atomic force microscopy (AFM) (seeFigure S2in the Supporting Information), indicating the formation of the multilayer film.(30,31)The changes in surface morphology also indicated the successful formation of the porous film, where the modified Au electrodes had a higher roughness than the unmodified Au electrode.Figure S3(see the Supporting Information) shows the changes the in surface potential induced by the addition of a small biomolecule, ascorbic acid (MW: 176) and large biomolecules, namely, bovine serum albumin (MW: 66 kDa), HSA (MW: 66 kDa), and α-amylase (MW: 62 kDa) in undiluted phosphate-buffered saline (PBS). Accordingly, the aminophenyl multilayer film grafted on the Au electrode had little effect on the sensitivity to the small biomolecule (ascorbic acid), whereas the sensitivity to the macromolecules (bovine serum albumin, HSA, and amylase) was suppressed by nearly 80% compared with that in the case of the unmodified Au electrode. Therefore, the suppression was specific to the addition of large biomolecules. Moreover, the sensor was able to quantitatively determine ascorbic acid in the solution containing HSA with comparable sensitivity. In a previous study, we showed that the use of a nitrobenzene monolayer film leads to almost complete suppression even of the penetration of small biomolecules.(30)Therefore, the use of a multilayer was necessary for a well-balanced inhibitory effect. Determining the spaces in the nanoporous membrane gives the insight to explain the phenomena. According to a previous study, 60% of the nitrophenyl groups are electrochemically active in the multilayer film. Besides, the density and thickness of the fully covered nitrophenyl monolayer on the Au electrode were 6.2 × 10–10mol/cm2and 0.8 nm, respectively.(31,32)Therefore, the fully covered nitrophenyl monolayer film formed by the reduction of the aryldiazonium salt had a density of 3.7 molecules/nm2. On the other hand, the grafting density of the multilayer film per layer in this study was 2.4 molecules/nm2, assuming that each layer had the same density. Therefore, the multilayer film had extra spaces for about 1.3 molecules/nm2in each layer compared with the monolayer film with the maximum coverage, which is only sufficient for small biomolecules to penetrate through the film and access the Au electrode.

In the next step, the aminophenyl multilayer film on the Au electrode was further functionalized by PBA to complete the nanofilter fabrication for serotonin recognition with a high S/N ratio. Here, the PBA functional group was covalently bound to the multilayer film by merely immersing the aminophenyl-functionalized Au substrate in the solution containing PBA and the catalyst. As a control group, a sensor without PBA functionalization was prepared by also immersing the substrate in the same solution containing PBA but before the electrochemical reduction of the nitrophenyl group to the aminophenyl group (i.e., amidation did not occur). Then, the multilayer film of the control group was subjected to cyclic voltammetry (CV) after immersing it in the PBA solution to control the electrochemical activity of the Au surface. The cyclic voltammetry confirmed that the nitrophenyl group on the control substrate remained electrochemically active (seeFigure S4in the Supporting Information). Furthermore, the cyclic voltammogram after ten potential cycles was identical to that of the nanofilter-modified substrate, indicating that both substrates have the same electrochemical activity, which enabled a successful comparison in the FET real-time measurement.

The changes in the surface potentials of the nanofilter-modified (nanofilter with PBA) and control (nanofilter without PBA) sensors were monitored in real-time while varying the concentration of the analytes in undiluted PBS.Figure2shows the changes in the surface potential of the nanofilter-modified (diamonds) and control (circle) sensors plotted against the concentrations of serotonin, norepinephrine, epinephrine, dopamine, and cortisol on a logarithmic scale. As shown inFigure2A, the nanofilter-modified sensor showed a linear response to serotonin in the range of concentrations in blood (0.6–2 μM),(33)having a sensitivity of 23 mV/decade. Therefore, the sensor can quantitatively determine serotonin under physiological conditions without any dilution. The surface potential rapidly decreased upon the addition of serotonin to the solution and stabilized within 5 min (seeFigure S5in the Supporting Information). The sensitive detection was realized by the free penetration of serotonin through the nanofilter to approach the Au surface, where the direct surface electrochemical reaction on the highly active Au surface generated the change in the surface potential. As expected from the nanofilter design, the response of the control sensor (i.e., the sensor without PBA) had an almost negligible effect on the sensor response to serotonin, having a slightly higher sensitivity of 26 mV/decade. The detection sensitivity slightly decreased upon adding PBA to the nanofilter, probably because the addition of PBA partially filled the spaces in the multilayer film, which inhibited the penetration.

In contrast to the sensor response to serotonin, the inclusion or noninclusion of PBA in the nanofilter significantly affected the response to the interfering biomolecules, namely, norepinephrine, dopamine, and epinephrine (Figure2B–D, respectively), or catecholamines as a group. The nanofilter-modified sensor with PBA significantly suppressed the changes in the surface potential, where the detection curve of the senor with PBA (Figure2B–D, diamonds) shifted to the high concentration range compared with that of the sensor without PBA (Figure2B–D, circles). The suppression occurred because catecholamines, having been captured by the nanofilter via the formation of stable esters between PBA and catecholamines, were prevented from approaching the Au sensing surface. Therefore, the nanofilter interface successfully distinguished the difference in the chemical structure between serotonin and catecholamines.Figure2E shows the detection sensitivity of the sensor to the added cortisol. The addition of cortisol induced a negligible change in the Au surface potential, because cortisol is electrochemically inactive and did not react with the Au electrode.

Figure3shows the filtering effect of the nanofilter-modified EG-Au-FET biosensor obtained on the basis of the data shown inFigure2.Figure3A shows the suppression ratio of the nanofilter-modified sensor compared with the control sensor. The suppression ratio was calculated using the change in the surface potential at 31.6 nM of each analyte to clarify the effect of the nanofilter. The degree of suppression was as high as 70% for the detection of dopamine and epinephrine and reached 99.5% for norepinephrine. As discussed later, the degree of suppression depended on the boronate affinity.(34,35)Therefore, the nanofilter-modified sensor can specifically suppress the electrical signal from the interfering biomolecules having a catechol group.Figure3B shows the performance of the sensor to the detection of serotonin. Here, the performance was calculated as the ratio of the electrical signal at a serotonin concentration of 100 nM to that at a catecholamine concentration of 10 nM, considering that the concentration of serotonin in blood is at least 2 orders of magnitude higher than that of catecholamines (0.6–2 μM for serotonin and 0–4 nM for catecholamines).(33)Figure3B clearly shows that the nanofilter-modified sensor (with PBA) discriminated the electrical signal of serotonin from those of catecholamines in the detection range of serotonin in the blood. Moreover, the effect of the nanofilter with PBA on the electrical signal at each concentration was analyzed using the data shown inFigure2, focusing on the electrical signals upon the addition of serotonin and norepinephrine (seeFigure S6in the Supporting Information). The gray bar shows the ratio of ΔVoutfor norepinephrine detected using the control sensor without PBA to ΔVoutfor serotonin detected using the nanofilter-modified sensor with PBA (ΔVNE,control/ΔVSE,nanofilter) and the black bar shows the ratio of ΔVoutfor norepinephrine detected using the nanofilter-modified sensor with PBA to ΔVoutfor serotonin detected using the nanofilter-coated sensor with PBA (ΔVNE,nanofilter/ΔVSE,nanofilter).Figure S6shows that the latter ratio was sufficiently lower than the former ratio in a wide range of concentrations from 10 nM to 10 μM, although the difference between these ratios was not significant at above 10 μM for both serotonin and norepinephrine. Thus, the nanofilter with PBA clearly contributed to the increase in the S/N ratio for the detection of serotonin using the FET sensors. In addition, from the latter ratio, the electrical signal upon the addition of serotonin became higher than that upon the addition of norepinephrine at lower concentrations (<1 μM) detected using the nanofilter-modified sensor. The S/N ratio of serotonin signals with respect to dopamine and epinephrine signals may be improved by controlling the binding constant of the receptor in the nanofilter, as explained below.

Quantifying the effect of the nanofilter allows us to understand the mechanism of the specific suppression and gives a strategic insight to improve the sensor response. In this regard, the sensor response was characterized by adhesion isotherm analysis. We conducted the analysis by considering the covalent catecholamine/PBA binding as the adhesion of the catecholamine to the specific binding site (PBA) in the nanofilter.Figure4A shows the relationship between the concentrations of the unbound, free species (Cc,free) and the bound species (Cc,ad) at equilibrium (the detailed derivation of the equations are explained in theSupporting Information). The relationship betweenCc,freeandCc,adfollowed Henry’s law because the analyte concentration is much lower than the buffer ion concentration. The linear slope represents the binding constantKd; in this case, the binding constant of the adhesion of catecholamine to the nanofilter. The values of logKdwere 4.9, 4.4, and 4.3 for norepinephrine, dopamine, and epinephrine, respectively. Notably, the binding constants of norepinephrine/PBA and dopamine/PBA esters determined in the previous study were 4.81 and 4.56, respectively, which are comparable to those determined by adhesion isotherm analysis in this study.(36)The similarity between these values indicates that the quantitative effect of the suppression using the nanofilter interface directly reflects the binding capability of the receptor included in the nanofilter. Therefore, the performance of the sensor can be improved using receptors having higher binding constants for the interfering biomolecules. Moreover, the sensor response can be tuned to the appropriate concentration range of the analyte in bodily fluids by merely modifying the binding constant of the receptor in the nanofilter, which shows the potential of this strategy for various biosensing applications.

The relative amounts of serotonin and catecholamines reaching the Au electrode were estimated from the data shown inFigures2and4A.Figure4B shows the relative amounts of serotonin and catecholamines that reached the Au electrode after passing through the nanofilter with PBA against those that reached the Au electrode after passing through the aryl-derivative multilayer without PBA, that is, the filtering effect of the nanofilter with PBA at various concentrations. These results indicate the ratio ofCc,freetoCc[(Cc,free/Cc) × 100%], which is defined in theSupporting Information. Also, this rate was calculated as the ratio of ΔVoutwith PBAobtained using the FET sensor with PBA to ΔVoutwithout PBAobtained using the FET sensor without PBA (ΔVoutwith PBA/ΔVoutwithout PBA) × 100%. ΔVoutwas generated by the oxidation reaction of small biomolecules reaching the Au electrode. As a result, the rate of each biomolecule did not change largely with respect to the change in the concentrations of serotonin and catecholamines, although the absolute value of ΔVoutincreased with their increasing concentrations. In particular, regarding the relative amounts of norepinephrine that reached the Au electrode, the interaction of norepinephrine with the Au electrode was suppressed most effectively by the nanofilter with PBA, whereas serotonin more easily reached the Au electrode than catecholamines regardless of the presence of PBA. However, the relative amount of serotonin decreased to approximately 70% with the increasing serotonin concentration. This means that serotonin did not bind to PBA but encountered steric hindrance from the relatively densely packed aryldiazonium multilayer with PBA molecules. In fact, the charge transfer resistance (RCT) of the aryldiazonium multilayer without PBA was increased by introducing PBA, as shown inFigure S7 and Table S1(see the Supporting Information). That is, the electron transfer induced by the redox reaction of the ferricyanide/ferrocyanide mediator with the Au electrode may have been prevented by PBA molecules bound at the aryldiazonium multilayer.

Finally, we demonstrate the quantitative detection of serotonin with a high S/N ratio using the EG-Au-FET biosensor with the PBA–nanofilter interface in a model sample solution containing various stress biomarker interferences.Figure5shows the normalized responses of the sensors with PBA (diamonds) and without PBA (circles) to serotonin around the concentration range in blood in undiluted PBS containing 7.1 nM norepinephrine, 0.48 nM dopamine, 3.1 nM epinephrine, 1.7 μM cortisol, and 0.1 mg/mL HSA. The concentrations of dopamine, norepinephrine, epinephrine, and cortisol were twice the maximum concentrations in blood.(33)The nanofilter-modified sensor successfully and quantitatively determined serotonin even in the model sample solution containing interfering biomolecules with the sensitivity (slope) of 31 per decade. On the other hand, in the case of the sensor without PBA, the detection sensitivity to serotonin was 14, which was significantly lower than that of the PBA-included sensor. The sensitivity decreased because the interfering biomolecules could freely access the Au electrode by penetrating through the nanofilter without PBA, which led to competitive reactions on the Au sensing surface. The addition of the solution containing only the interfering biomolecules to the sensor, in fact, gave signals of 0.7 and 2 mV for the sensors with and without PBA, respectively. The slopes based on the normalization [ΔVnorm= (ΔVout– ΔVblank)/ΔVblank] inFigure5show the effect of the blank signals (0.7 and 2 mV) for the sensors with and without PBA. That is, ΔVblank= 0.7 for the sensor with PBA was lower than ΔVblank= 2 for the sensor without PBA. Therefore, the quantitative determination of serotonin with the high S/N ratio in the model sample solution was realized using the EG-Au-FET biosensor with the sensing surface modified by the nanofilter interface with PBA as a receptor.

We proposed to enhance a S/N ratio for detecting a small-biomolecule stress marker, serotonin, using an EG-Au-FET biosensor with the surface functionalized by the nanofilter. The highly electromotive Au surface enabled highly sensitive recognition but without specificity or selectivity to the target biomolecule, serotonin. In this regard, we designed a nanofilter on a Au surface with a porous multilayer film with PBA so that only targeted small biomolecules, such as serotonin, but not macrobiomolecules such as proteins, can come in contact with the Au surface through the multilayer film. Simultaneously, the PBA in the nanofilter captured small interfering biomolecules such as catecholamines before they reached the Au surface. As a result, the nonspecific electrical signal from the large biomolecules was specifically suppressed by 80% after the functionalization of the Au surface. Furthermore, the nanofilter-modified sensor could quantitatively detect serotonin in the range of serotonin concentrations in the blood with a sensitivity of 23 mV/decade. The sensor with PBA specifically suppressed the signal of catecholamine responses by up to 99.5%. Adhesion isotherm analysis revealed that the effect of the nanofilter directly reflected the binding constant of the interfering biomolecules and receptors. Therefore, one can improve or modulate the sensor response to the desired value by merely replacing the receptor in the nanofilter with one having sufficient affinity. Finally, we demonstrated the detection of serotonin with the high S/N ratio in a model of a bodily fluid containing norepinephrine, dopamine, epinephrine, cortisol, and HSA as interfering molecules. The sensor with PBA showed a quantitative response to serotonin with sufficiently high sensitivity, showing the possibility of the nanofilter design for various biosensing applications. In the future, we can improve the sensor stability by functionalizing the nanofilter surface with antifouling polymers. In this study, the nanoporous filter suppressed the nonspecific electrical signal of large biomolecules but large biomolecules may still adhere to the nanofilter surface, causing severe fouling of the surface. Therefore, in the future, the design and development of the polymeric nanofilter will be modified to improve the sensor response.

Chemicals were used as received unless otherwise stated. Tetrabutylammonium hexafluorophosphate (nBu4PF6, 95%), 4-carboxy-3-fluorophenylboronic acid (FPBA), 4-(4,6-dimethoxy-1,3,5-triazine-2-yl)-4-methylmorpholinium chloriden-hydrate (DMT-MM, 98%), dopamine hydrochloride (DA), hydrocortisone (cortisol, 97%), albumin from human serum (HSA, 96%), albumin from bovine serum (BSA, 98%), α-amylase (AMY), potassium chloride (KCl), acetonitrile, acetone, methanol, ethanol, 1 M hydrochloric acid (HCl), and phosphate-buffered saline (PBS, 1×) were purchased from FUJIFILM Wako Pure Chemical Corporation. 4-Nitrobenzenediazonium tetrafluoroborate (NBD, 98%), serotonin hydrochloride (SE, 97%),l-noradrenaline bitartrate (norepinephrine, NE, 98%),l-adrenaline bitartrate (epinephrine, EP, 98%), andl-ascorbic acid (99%) were purchased from Tokyo Chemical Industry Co., Ltd.

Au/Cr (100/10 nm) thin film sputtered on a glass substrate (7.5 cm × 2.5 cm) was purchased from Kyowa International. The substrates were cut into eight pieces with the same dimensions. Any organic contaminants were removed from the Au surface prior to the electrochemical grafting by immersing into acetone and methanol each for 10 min. Then, the cleaned Au electrode was pretreated with cyclic voltammetry (CV) in 100 mM nBu4PF6in acetonitrile from 0.6 to 0.1 V vs Ag/AgCl for 2 cycles, in which the Au surface was electrochemically cleaned and activated. An electrochemical analyzer (618E, BAS Instruments) was used for the electrochemical surface treatments, and potential was applied through the Ag/AgCl reference electrode in the saturated KCl, which was connected to the acetonitrile solution through the salt bridge (agarose gel with 3 M KCl). Then, the cleaned Au electrode was immersed in acetonitrile solution (2 mM NBD and 100 mM nBu4PF6) in an ice bath, and potential was applied from 0.6 to 0.1 V vs Ag/AgCl for 3 cycles where the nitrobenzene (Ph-NO2) multilayer was grafted on the Au electrode. The Ph-NO2-grafted Au electrode was washed with methanol and distilled water and then dried in a flow of N2.

In the next step, Ph-NO2was reduced to Ph-NH2by the following procedure. The Ph-NO2-grafted Au electrode was immersed in a 10% ethanol solution containing 100 mM KCl, and potential was applied from 0 to −1.05 V vs Ag/AgCl for 10 cycles until the oxidative peak (peak II inFigure S1B) disappeared. The reduced samples were washed with distilled water and then dried in N2flow. PBA was introduced into the nanofilter layer by immersing the Ph-NH2modified Au electrode in a solution of 100 mM FPBA and 100 mM DMT-MM in methanol for 18 h. The control group was prepared in the same manner but in a different order. That is, the Ph-NO2-grafted Au electrode was immersed in methanol containing FPBA (100 mM) and DMT-MM (100 mM) for 18 h before reducing the nitrophenyl group to the aminophenyl group via cyclic voltammetry.

The surface of the Au electrode was characterized by atomic force microscopy (AFM, Agilent 5500, Toyo Corporation). In the AFM measurement, images were collected by an AC tapping mode with the PPR-NCHR-10 probe (NANOSENSORS). For the characterization of surface morphology, the images were collected by measuring the surface roughness of the multilayer-coated Au electrode. For determining the multilayer thickness, only a part of the Au electrode was modified by the multilayer film by covering the Au surface with a photoresist. The photoresist was patterned on the Au electrode by photolithography, as briefly described in the following. The cleaned Au electrode (immersed in acetone and methanol for 10 min) was coated with a positive photoresist by spin coating (500 rpm for 5 s, followed by 3000 rpm for 30 s). After the prebaking process (110 °C for 3 min on a hot plate), the substrates were exposed to the ultraviolet (UV) light through a Cr-patterned glass mask for 4 s using a mask aligner (Q-2001CT, Quintel). The substrates were developed in a developer (NMD-W, 90 s), followed by the post-baking (120 °C for 3 min) on the hot plate. The photoresist-patterned substrates were coated by the multilayer film via cyclic voltammetry in a 2 mM NBD aqueous solution in 0.1 M HCl (0.5–0 V vs Ag/AgCl). The multilayer-grafted substrates were immersed in methanol for 12 h for lift-off. Finally, the AFM images were collected by measuring the gap between the unmodified/multilayer-grafted Au surfaces.

The potentiometric real-time measurement of the analytes was operated using a FET real-time monitoring system (Optogenesys). The nanofilter-modified Au electrodes were connected to the extended gate of the n-channel junction-type FET (K246-Y9A, Toshiba). The sensing surface was separated from the connection by the encapsulation with the polycarbonate ring (1 cm diameter). The sensing surface was covered with 500 μL 1× PBS buffer. In the measurement, a constant gate potential,VG(2 V), was applied through the Ag/AgCl reference electrode, which was connected to the solution through the salt bridge (agarose gel with 3 M KCl). The drain voltage,VD(5 V), was applied through the monitoring device to operate the device in a saturated region. The source–drain current,IDS, was set to 700 μA, and the change inVSwas monitored by the source-follower circuit, which was extracted to the monitor asVout. Therefore, in the operation system, change inVout(ΔVout) corresponds to the changes in the Au surface potential or the threshold voltage of the semiconductor (ΔVT). After surface potential was stabilized, the analyte was added to the sensing solution to obtain the desired concentration. The analyte was added every 5 min, and the surface potential was taken as an average of five points (the sensor collectsVoutevery 0.5 s) in 280 s after changing the concentration. In the detection of serotonin, interfering biomolecules (dopamine, epinephrine, norepinephrine, cortisol, and HSA) were first added to the sensing solution to obtain a blank response.