Surface functionalized β-Bi2O3 nanofibers based flexible, field-effect transistor-biosensor (BioFET) for rapid, label-free detection of serotonin in biological fluids
Author links open overlay panel
Sushmitha Veeralingam
, 
Sushmee Badhulika

Show more

Add to Mendeley

Share

Cite
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.snb.2020.128540
Get rights and content
Full text access
Highlights
•
BioFET for detecting serotonin using Surface functionalized β-Bi2O3 nanofibers.
•
BioFET exhibited a transconductance of 5.23 μS and mobility of 64.4 cm2 V−1s−1 and excellent Ion/ Ioff ratio ∼106
•
BioFET exhibited sensitivity of 51.64 μA/nM over range of 10 nM- 1 μM and a limit of detection of 0.29 nM.
•
serotonin is analysed directly in buffer and test matrix utilizing a non-enzymatic BioFET.
Abstract
In this work, we demonstrate a high-performance Field effect transistor-based biosensor (BioFET) on Al functionalized β-Bi2O3 nanofibers for highly selective and rapid detection of serotonin. The β-Bi2O3 nanofibers were synthesized using electrospinning technique and conductivity was tailored by surface functionalization using Al nanoparticles. Interdigitated silver electrodes deposited over the flexible polyimide (PI) substrate acts as contact terminals and dielectric substrate respectively while Al functionalized β-Bi2O3 nanofibers acts as n-type semiconductor channel and a thermally evaporated silver electrode beneath the PI tape as a back-gate terminal. Detailed characterization reveals the formation of β-phase monoclinic, high mobility, 1-D Bi2O3 nanofibers, and Al functionalization was validated using elemental composition studies. The fabricated FET exhibited a transconductance of 5.23 μS and mobility of 64.4 cm2 V−1s−1 with an Ion/ Ioff ratio ∼106. The BioFET exhibited an excellent sensitivity of 51.64 μA/nM towards serotonin over a wide linear detection range of 10 nM- 1 μM and a limit of detection of 0.29 nM. This can be ascribed to the excellent change in surface potential upon interaction of serotonin molecules with the electroactive surface functionalized multidimensional nanoparticle-nanofiber network and the back-gate electrode-based control of the Debye screening length. The fabricated BioFET exhibits excellent sensitivity, stability and reproducibility with a rapid response time of 0.8 s. Excellent selectivity towards serotonin in the presence of interfering analytes like ascorbic acid (AA), uric acid (UA), Glucose, Na+, K+, Dopamine (DA) is observed owing to the formation of selective binding complexes between the aromatic amine and β-Bi2O3. The real-time applicability of the sensor was successfully tested using urine samples as a test matrix thus establishing it as a promising platform for label free detection of biomolecules in point-of care diagnostics.
Graphical abstract

Download: Download high-res image (169KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Previous article in issue
Next article in issue
Keywords
β-Bi2O3 nanofibersSurface functionalizationField effect transistorSerotoninMBiosensor
1. Introduction
Serotonin is a crucial monoamine neurotransmitter in the human body which is responsible for numerous physiological functions like state of mind, sleep, desire and appetite. Normal concentrations of serotonin present in human blood and urine is in the range of 10 ng/ml – 28 ng/ml [1]. Abnormal secretion of serotonin leads to fluctuations in human behaviour and severe symptoms include seizures and irregular heartbeats. Inadequate levels of serotonin in body fluids leads to mental depression, sudden infant death syndrome, schizophrenia, and autism [1,2]. In addition, monitoring serotonin levels in body fluids is essential in diagnosis of disorders like carcinoid syndrome, attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), serotonin syndrome etc [2]. Hence, precise detection of serotonin levels demands for low cost, portable miniaturized systems for point of care diagnostics.
Various analytical platforms have been employed for serotonin detection including, High Performance Liquid Chromatography (HPLC), enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA), fluorometry chemiluminescence and mass spectroscopy techniques [[3], [4], [5]]. These techniques are however expensive, time consuming, least selective and involve complex processing steps. The growing need for rapid and reliable sensing has led to the advent of techniques which provide continuous real time monitoring of serotonin in body fluids. Electrochemical techniques like Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy (EIS), Amperometry, differential pulse voltammetry have been reported as responsive and sensitive low-cost systems [6,7]. However, the shortcomings in electrochemical studies are the selection of electroactive species with respect to the analyte, unreliable electrical signal due to higher concentrations of interfering species, background peaks due to electrode charging and fouling. In this regard, three terminal FETs with source, gate and drain are gaining interest owing to low weight, cost-effectiveness, and scalability, and can be easily integrated into a Lab-on-a-chip systems. The Bio-FETs are highly selective due to the adsorption of gate-based surface charge potentials. Immunoassay based FET detect the analytes through the event of formation of specific antigen-antibody complexes. However, the selective immobilization includes modifiers, polymers and binders, which apparently reduces the sensitivity of the device. FET based biosensors (BioFETs) are charge-sensitive devices which acts as an intrinsic amplifier converting unit changes in potential to exponential increase in output current, which is highly preferable for detection of crucial micro-molecules like neurotransmitters. FET based biosensors effectively determine the levels of the sensing analyte in presence of a gate based electric field. This in turn enables superior sensitivity, selectivity, practical applicability, rapid response, reproducibility employing a low-cost fabrication platform. Moreover, back gate FET is highly advantageous due to its non-interference nature with the analyte and producing an accurate electrical response signal [8].
Low dimensional metal oxides like WO3 [9], NiO [10], ZnO [11], Bi2O3 [12] etc. have gained wide for sensing applications interest owing to their enhanced catalytic properties in addition to their electronic, ionic and optical properties. Among these, Bismuth trioxide (Bi2O3) is of great potential interest in sensing, catalysis, fuel cells application [12] due to its stability and ionic conductivity. This makes it highly suitable as a channel material for biosensing applications. 1 d- nanostructures like nanotubes, nanorods, nanowires and nanofibers are widely explored for sensing applications owing to their large surface to volume ratio. In particular, nanofibers exhibit high carrier mobility in the directional easy axis, excellent adhesion with very good mechanical and chemical stability [13]. Previously, nanofibers have been synthesized using various techniques like drawing, template synthesis, self-assembly and electrospinning. Among them, electrospinning technique is considered the most effective, versatile and reliable for synthesis of inorganic metal oxides nanofibers. Thus, it would be highly advantageous to explore the synthesis of Bi2O3 nanofibers via electrospinning technique. Besides, 1-D nanofibers offer scope for easy surface functionalization using metal nanoparticles enabling the precise control of electronic states of nanofibers by interacting with the dangling bonds [14]. The functionalization allows the co-existence of multidimensional nanostructures on the surface enabling high surface area leading to enhanced interaction of the bioanalyte with the nanoparticles [15].
In this work, Al functionalized β-Bi2O3 nanofibers was used as the channel for the FET based serotonin biosensor. The interdigitated silver electrodes over the flexible polyimide substrate was used as a metal and dielectric platform for the FET. Al functionalized β-Bi2O3 nanofibers were fabricated via electrospinning technique and used as a n-type semiconductor. The morphology studies of the synthesized surface functionalized nanofibers revealed the formation of Al nanoparticles decorated along the surface of β-Bi2O3 nanofibers. The elemental composition revealed the formation of Bi, O and low concentration of Al elements. The fabricated biosensor displayed a rapid response towards wide linear range of serotonin concentrations ranging between 10 nM to 1 μM. It also recorded excellent selectivity towards serotonin in the presence of the major interfering analytes like dopamine, Uric acid, ascorbic acid, glucose, Na + and K + . An enhanced sensitivity of 51.64 μA/nM and limit of detection of 0.29 nM was obtained owing to the large surface area and co-existence of multidimensional nanostructures. To the best of authors knowledge, this is the first report on Al functionalized β-Bi2O3 nanofibers-based Bio-FET for detection of serotonin with performance surpassing previously reported techniques, thus being a promising platform for developing low cost, miniaturised and scalable systems for healthcare applications.
2. Experimental details
2.1. Materials
Bismuth nitrate (Bi (NO3)3.5H2O), Dimethyl formaldehyde (DMF), Serotonin, glacial acetic acid, Polyvinyl pyrolidine (PVP), polyimide tape, NaCl, KCl, Na2HPO4, KH2PO4 and 99.99 % pure silver and aluminum metal pellets were procured from Sigma Aldrich. DI water was collected from Millipore system.
2.2. Instrumentation
CARL ZEISS Ultra-55 SEM was used to perform EDAX (Energy dispersive Xray analysis) and Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) analysis. X’pert PRO X-ray diﬀ ;raction (XRD) with Cu Kα radiation was used for Structural studies. Senterra in Via opus, Bruker was used to perform Raman Spectroscopy using an excitation wavelength of 532 nm. Differential pulse voltammetry (DPV) studies were performed using CHI 660E electrochemical workstation at room temperature using a three-electrode cell setup consisting of Al functionalized Bi2O3 nanofibers on Glassy Carbon Electrode (GCE) as the working electrode, 1 M KCl Ag|AgCl as the reference electrode and a platinum wire electrode as the counter electrode. All electrical measurements were performed using Keithley 2450 SMU instrument.
2.3. Synthesis and device fabrication
2.3.1. Fabrication of interdigitated silver electrodes over polyimide substrate
Fig. 1 shows the fabrication of the BioFET. Initially, Polyimide tape was cleaned in an ultrasonicated bath using acetone solution for 10 min. The cleaned polyimide tape (1 cm x 1 cm) was used as the flexible substrate for fabricating the FET device. The polyimide tape was selectively masked using the scotch tape on the overall surface except for each electrode fingers with a dimension of 4.50 mm x 0.100 mm. These unmasked region over the polyimide tape is available for thermal evaporation. After forming a shadow mask using scotch tape, the unmasked regions were deposited with silver electrodes using thermal evaporation technique. The rotating sample holder with polyimide tape and target (silver pellets) was separated by a distance of 25 cm. The external current for deposition was maintained at 80–100 A in a vacuum chamber at a pressure of 10−5 Torr. The deposition rate was maintained as 1.2 nm/s to obtain a film thickness of 250 nm. Similarly, the back-gate silver electrode was deposited on the polyimide substrate using the same pressure and current values to obtain a 250 nm thick electrode and further used as source, drain and gate electrodes.
Fig. 1
Download: Download high-res image (556KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 1. Schematic diagram representing the fabrication of Al functionalized β-Bi2O3 nanofibers-based FET.

2.3.2. Synthesis of β-Bi2O3 nanofibers
Briefly, 2.39 M of Bi (NO3)3 0.5H2O was added to the 15 ml of DMF and stirred until a yellow colour solution A was obtained. Further, 1.2 M of PVP was added to 5 mL of glacial acetic acid and stirred for 3 h to obtain solution B. The obtained solutions (A + B) were mixed together and stirred for 12 h until the precursors are completely dissolved. The solution was filled in the syringe and nanofibers were spun at 18 kV of DC voltage. The distance between aluminium foil and the needle tip was separated by 12 cm and a flow rate of 0.5 mL/hr was maintained. The obtained β-Bi2O3 nanofibers were annealed at 450 °C for 2 h in a furnace. The nanofibers were deposited on to the interdigitated silver electrode channels of the polyimide substrate as shown in Fig. 1, to fabricate a FET based biosensor.
2.3.3. Fabrication of flexible Al functionalized β-Bi2O3 nanofibers-based FET device
The β-Bi2O3 nanofibers were deposited onto the interdigitated silver electrodes using facile drop-casting technique. The surface functionalization was carried out using the aluminium pellets, which were thermally evaporated for a very short time over the fabricated β-Bi2O3 nanofiber channelled FET. The Al nanoparticles were deposited over the β-Bi2O3 nanofibers at a chamber pressure of 10−5 Torr. The deposition rate was maintained as 1.2 nm/s for 10 s. The fabricated Al functionalized β-Bi2O3 nanofibers based BioFET was further used for electrical characterization. The photograph of the fabricated BioFET is given in Supplementary information (SI) Fig. S1. The BioFET was fabricated on a 1 cm x 1 cm polyimide tape of thickness 300 μm (dielectric thickness). The dimensions of each interdigitated electrode fingers were 4.50 mm x 1.00 mm. The channel dimensions (L x W) were 200 μm x 300 μm over which Al functionalized β-Bi2O3 nanofibers were uniformly deposited.
2.4. Preparation of serotonin samples
Phosphate buffer solution (pH 7.2) was prepared by mixing 6.844 mM of NaCl, 1.34 mM of KCl, 0.507 mM of Na2HPO4 and 8.81 mM of KH2PO4 in 0.2 mL of DI water. Urine sample was collected from a 24-year adult and used as real time sample. Various concentrations of serotonin samples were prepared in phosphate buffer solution for sensing studies and for real time analysis.
3. Results and Discussion
3.1. Morphological and structural analysis
Detailed characterization was carried out to analyse the morphological and structural properties of the fabricated Al functionalized β-Bi2O3 nanofibers-based BioFET. Morphological studies were carried out using Scanning electron microscopy (SEM). Fig. 2(a) displays the low magnification SEM images of the interdigitated silver electrode. The SEM images display a uniform deposition of silver electrodes with regular and uniform spacing available for the deposition of β-Bi2O3 nanofibers. Fig. 2(b) displays the low magnification image of the interdigitated electrodes along with the deposited β-Bi2O3 nanofibers. Fig. 2(c) displays the high magnification images of the Al functionalized β-Bi2O3 nanofibers. The formation of 1D- nanofibers structures of β-Bi2O3 can be attributed to the dipole moment of PVP, which increases due to charge transport associated with bismuth element along the C-C chain leading to the long fibre orientation during electrospinning [16]. The nanofibers were also found to be uniformly spread across the channels of the FET based biosensor. A single nanofibers strand and nanoparticle cluster was observed as shown in Fig. 2(d) supporting the co-existence of multidimensional nanostructures. The morphology of the surface functionalized Al nanoparticles can be attributed to the operating pressure and temperature conditions during thermal evaporation technique. The Al nanoparticles were grown on the nanofibers via the nucleation-growth mechanism. The morphology is determined by the kinetic and thermodynamic conditions of the fibres and the Al nanoparticles [17]. Further, the low pressure in the chamber facilitated in the nanoscale agglomeration of Al nanoparticles which ultimately provides multi-dimensional surface area for the effective interaction of serotonin molecules. The average diameter of the nanofibers was found to be in the range of 25−30 nm and the size of nanoparticles ranged from 15−50 nm. EDAX spectra was carried out to analyse the elemental composition of the synthesized Al functionalized β-Bi2O3 nanostructures as shown in Fig. 2 (e). The atomic ratios of Bi, O and Al were found to be 12.1 %, 81.6 % and 6.2 %, respectively. The obtained results illustrate the presence of Bi, O and Al atoms, without any impurity atoms.
Fig. 2
Download: Download high-res image (1MB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 2. a) Low magnification images of interdigitated silver electrodes b) Low magnification images of interdigitated silver electrodes and Al functionalized β-Bi2O3 nanofiber channel c) & d) high magnification micrographs of Al functionalized β-Bi2O3 nanofibers e) Elemental composition studies of Al functionalized β-Bi2O3 nanofibers.

XRD studies were carried out to analyse the phase and structure of the electro-spun Bi2O3 nanofibers as displayed in Fig. 3(a). Inorganic metal oxide like Bi2O3 are reported to exist as four polymorphs namely, α - Bi2O3 [18], β- Bi2O3 [18], γ- Bi2O3 [19], δ- Bi2O3 [20]. The α - Bi2O3 is a monoclinic disoriented phase with Bismuth atoms parallel to the (100) phase separated by oxygen atoms. Further, γ- Bi2O3 is a highly unstable phase and the conductivity of δ- Bi2O3 was found to be very less due to the presence of high degree of disorders. The β phase is studied as an intermediate conductive phase with excellent electroactive sites being appropriate for biosensing application [18]. Hence, β phased Bi2O3 nanofibers were synthesized and the obtained XRD patterns displayed the peaks at 2θ - 26°, 29°, 33°, 34°, 35°, 35.8°, 37.8°, 40.3°,44.8°, 47°, 48°, 52°, 54°,55°, 57°, 62°, 68°, 71° corresponding to the diffractions from (002), (120), (012), (211), (202), (022), (102), (112), (222), (023), (223), (312), (322), (222), (224), (311), (402), (400), (233) planes of β phase tetragonal Bi2O3 crystals. The obtained results are consistent with the JCPDS PDF no 76-1730 [18]. The molecular finger print of the fabricated β phased Bi2O3 nanofibers was further studied using Raman analysis as shown in Fig. 3(b). The peaks were found at 66 cm−1, 89 cm−1, 124 cm−1 161 cm-1 197 cm−1, 313 cm−1, 326 cm−1, 465 cm-1 corresponds to the stretching of Bi-O [21]. The lattice dynamics display several modes of Bi-O vibrations. The high intensity peaks at ∼89 and ∼125 cm−1 are composed of pairs of modes at 89 and 94 cm−1 and 124 and 127 cm−1, respectively [21]. The IR active modes were studied and analysed using FTIR spectroscopy as shown in Fig. 3(c). The bands at ∼1600 and ∼1571 cm−1 corresponds to the OH hydroxyl groups and Hsingle bondOH vibrations. The peaks at 844 cm−1 is related to the symmetrical vibration of Bi-O relating to BiO3. Very weak signal at 1055 cm−1 can also be attributed to Bi-O vibrations [22]. The other observed bands signify the characteristic stretching vibration of Bi-O due to distorted BiO6 octahedral sites, validating the formation of β phase Bi2O3.
Fig. 3
Download: Download high-res image (264KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 3. a) X-Ray diffraction pattern b) RAMAN spectrum c) FTIR spectrum of Al functionalized β-Bi2O3 nanofibers.

3.2. Electrical characteristics of the Bio-FET
Fig. 4(a) displays the schematic diagram of the Al functionalized β-Bi2O3 nanofibers-based FET. The biosensor was constructed with a flexible interdigitated silver electrode coated with Al functionalized β-Bi2O3 nanofibers channels and the analyte was tested in presence of a liquid PBS medium of pH -7.2. The interdigitated silver electrodes act as the source and drain contacts while the gate potential was applied via the back gate using thermally evaporated silver electrodes as shown in Fig. 4(a). Fig. 4(b) displays the Log Ids (output current flowing between source and drain) vs Vgs (Input potential between gate and source terminal) transfer curve of the fabricated FET based biosensor. The logarithmic response is discoursed in this study to address the significance of the positive charge exchange. The transfer characteristics were obtained by sweeping the Vgs from 0 V–30 V at a constant drain to source voltage of 1 V. The transfer curve displays a n-type behaviour, attributing to the accumulation of charge carriers resulting in increase of current flowing through source and drain. The electron-rich Al functionalization produces n-type transistor behaviour in the β-Bi2O3 nanofibers matrix by acting as an electron donor. The transconductance (gm) of a FET is defined as the measure of change in drain current to that of the change in gate voltage. The gm for the β-Bi2O3 nanofibers based BioFET was obtained to be 5.23 μS. The threshold voltage (VT) is defined as the minimum gate-to-source potential required to create a conducting channel between the source and drain terminals The VT was found to be 15 V for the fabricated FET and the on-off ratio was obtained as 106. The mobility of the electrons was calculated using the equation 
 ; where 
 is transconductance, L x W are the channel length and width, respectively and C is the capacitance per unit area. The mobility was obtained as 64.4 cm2 V−1 S-1 implying minor scattering effect, possibly due to the defects in the fabricated 1-D, β-Bi2O3 nanofibers channel. The output characteristics of the fabricated FET was acquired between Ids vs Vds by sweeping the Vds (the potential between source to drain terminal) from −1 V to +1 V at a fixed gate to source voltage (Vgs – 15 V). Fig. 4(c) depicts the linear relationship between Ids and Vds indicating an Ohmic behaviour between the Al- functionalized β-Bi2O3 nanofibers and the silver electrode. The ohmic behaviour can be ascribed to the barrier free electrical contacts and enhanced conductivity of nanofibers. The obtained intrinsic characteristics clearly indicate that the functionalized β-Bi2O3 nanofibers is a highly reliable platform for detecting serotonin molecules in buffer solution.
Fig. 4
Download: Download high-res image (333KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 4. (a) Schematic diagram of Al functionalized β-Bi2O3 nanofibers-based Bio-FET (b) Transfer characteristics Log Ids (Source-drain) – Vgs (gate-source) curve c) Output characteristics Ids- Vds curve of the FET.

3.3. Response of the Al functionalized β-Bi2O3 nanofibers-based FET towards serotonin
To analyse the performance of the fabricated BioFET, the device was exposed to different concentrations of serotonin and the electrical response Ids (drain-source current) was recorded as a function of the change in gate voltage (Vds) as depicted in Fig. 5(a). The Ids was found to change from “Off state” i.e Ids = 0 to “On state” i.e Ids > 0 upon increase in the drain voltage, similar to the transfer characteristics studies obtained without buffer solution. Further, the fabricated device was exposed with increase in concentrations of serotonin solutions, and the transfer curve was obtained after a waiting time of 10 min. Ids was observed to change upon interaction with serotonin molecules. This can be attributed to the increase in electrons on the surface of the Al- functionalized β-Bi2O3 nanofibers due to the oxidation of serotonin molecules [23]. The conductance of the channel was found to increase due to the Al functionalization which increases the direct electron transfer current on the surface of the Bi2O3 nanofibers. The charge transfer from the serotonin molecules to the Al- functionalized β-Bi2O3 nanofibers increases the current flowing through the source and drain. In a two terminal device the charged biomolecules that adsorb to the semiconductor sensor produces an electric field and the main obstacle in high ionic physiological samples is short Debye screening length [24]. Debye screening is defined as the screening or weakening of the net charge of a particle when there are a number of ions in the electrolyte -oxide medium, these ions will tend to form a cloud of ions around the charged particle which reduces the net effect of the charge, resulting in unreliable response. This phenomenon is majorly found in the electrolyte – oxide interface. To overcome this issue, the back-gate electrode-based design enables localised control of the net charge. The back-gate biasing helps in stronger coupling of front and back interfaces such that a potential shift at the top interface gets compensated by the shifts from the back gate resulting in the initial current levels in the channel prior to the chemical changes. Thus, amperometry studies were performed by effectively utilizing the back gate to increase the sensitivity and the minor scale detection of serotonin. Fig. 5(b) shows the electrical output for the FET upon successive addition of 10 nM of Serotonin. The response of the functionalized FET was obtained in the presence of liquid electrolyte consisting of Phosphate Buffer Solution (pH 7.2) at a constant drain – source voltage (Vds) of 0.29 V (electrochemical oxidation potential of serotonin) and a fixed saturated gate- source voltage (Vgs) of 15 V. The electroanalytical studies were performed as shown in Fig. S2 to determine the electrochemical oxidation potential of serotonin, which can be found in-detail SI section S2. A constant concentration of 10 nM serotonin was spiked on the FET channel at regular intervals of 5 s. Each FET based biosensor device responded rapidly (<1 s) towards the change in the serotonin concentration. The inset of Fig. 5(b) displays the linear calibration graph of the sensor plotted between normalised response vs concentration of the analyte for n = 5 sensors. A linear response was obtained for a wide range of 10 nM to 1 μM of serotonin with a sensitivity of 51.64 μA/nM and a regression coefficient of 0.99. The LOD was calculated as LOD = 3S/m (where, S- standard deviation of the response, m- sensitivity). A low limit of detection of 0.29 nM was obtained, which is far more superior when compared to the recent reports on serotonin sensing [25]. The obtained response provides an exceptional selectivity and precise analysis for detection of normal serotonin levels in human urine samples and also detects a wide range of serotonin facilitating the diagnosis of disorders. The response time of the BioFET is defined as the time taken by the change in current from 10 % to 90 % when exposed to certain concentration of serotonin [26].
Response time – t90 % - t10 %
Where, t10 % & t90%, are the response time corresponding to the 10 % and 90 % change in current when exposed to serotonin concentrations, respectively.
Fig. 5
Download: Download high-res image (870KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 5. a) Output characteristics obtained for BioFET for increase in concentrations of serotonin (b) Amperometric response of the fabricated biosensor for successive increase in concentrations of 10 nM of serotonin c) Schematics of the sensing mechanism of serotonin employing the Bi2O3 FET biosensor d) Interference studies using amperometric method for successive addition of serotonin, ascorbic acid, uric acid, Glucose, Na+, K+, Dopamine, and serotonin at an applied potential of 0.28 V. e) Detecting unknown concentrations of serotonin in urine samples using the fabricated FET biosensor inset: Standard addition approach graph.

Fig. 5(c) gives the schematic depicting the mechanism of fabricated Bio-FET. The functionalized Al nanoparticles acts as electron donors facilitating the oxidation of serotonin molecules by the removal of hydrogen atoms. Upon inducing a positive gate electric field, negative charges tend to accumulate on the surface of the β-Bi2O3 nanofibers which consequently increases the current flowing through source and drain. The increase in current with the increase in concentration of serotonin can be attributed to the oxidation of the serotonin molecules when interacting on the surface of Al functionalized β-Bi2O3 nanofibers at optimized electric fields and potential conditions. The response of the Al functionalized β-Bi2O3 nanofibers were found to be excellent in terms of sensitivity, lower limit of detection and wide linear range.
3.4. Interference studies
The selectivity of the Al functionalized β-Bi2O3 nanofibers-based BioFET towards serotonin was examined by real-time detection of serotonin in the presence of several interfering species like ascorbic acid (AA), uric acid (UA), Glucose, Na+, K+, Dopamine (DA), as shown in Fig. 5(d). The Vgs was maintained at threshold voltage (VT) required for the conducting source and drain channels and Vds was fixed at 0.29 V. A significant increase in current was obtained in response to serotonin with a no/minimal current response obtained for 50 folds concentration of vast excesses of interferent species. The Al functionalized β-Bi2O3 nanofibers-based platform displayed excellent selectivity towards serotonin. The selectivity can be attributed to the temporary binding of the serotonin molecules with Al atoms forming coordination complex resulting in excellent electron transport. The selective binding of serotonin induces the change in work function and modulates the conductivity of the Al functionalized β-Bi2O3 nanofibers. The formation of selective binding complexes between the aromatic amines and metal oxides is validated from the previous reports [25]. The Al functionalized β-Bi2O3 nanofibers-based FET biosensors displayed excellent selectivity towards serotonin.
3.5. Real time sensing of serotonin in urine samples
The real-time utility of the FET based serotonin sensor was validated by determining the unknown concentrations of serotonin in human urine samples. The preparation protocol of the urine samples is provided in the experimental section. The studies were performed by initially spiking unknown concentration (R) of serotonin into the urine sample. Further, few known concentrations of serotonin namely, 0.7 nM, 1.2 nM, 1.6 nM, 2.3 nM were spiked on the FET based sensor. The corresponding response is shown in Fig. 5(e). The employed method is known as the standard addition approach, used to quantify the unknown concentrations of serotonin molecules already present in the human urine samples [26]. The measured responses were plotted as a function of the concentration in the calibration plot as shown in the inset of Fig. 5(d). A linear plot was obtained in the positive x axis, which is interpolated in the x-axis such that it cuts the abscissa, and the corresponding value represents the unknown concentration of serotonin present in human urine samples. The unknown concentration was quantified as 3.4 nM. The obtained calibration results map well with the serotonin sensing results displayed in Fig. 5(b), thus establishing the practical applicability of the sensor. Further, the reliability of the BioFET based serotonin sensor was further evaluated by clinically testing the same urine samples.
3.6. Stability, reproducibility and Flexibility studies of the fabricated FET
Table 1 summarizes the concentrations of spiked serotonin and corresponding recovered concentrations. The sensor displays excellent recoverability with the relative standard deviation of 1.33 %. The reusability and stability of the fabricated Al functionalized β-Bi2O3 nanofibers-based FET sensor was assessed by monitoring changes in the response of the sensor as a function of time by spiking a constant concentration of serotonin (50 nM), as shown in the SI Fig. S3. The flexibility of the fabricated FET was evaluated by obtaining the normalised current by subjecting it to a strain for 300 bending cycles. The response was measured at regular intervals after bringing back the sensor to normal flat position (unstrained condition) after subjecting it to a strain. The response to the bending studies is shown in Fig. 6. The response of the device was studied using the following formula, R = ΔI/I0, where ΔI is the change in current upon analyte interaction and I0 being the initial current. A negligible change in response was obtained for 300 bending cycles confirming the excellent robustness [27]. This can be attributed to the strong adhering properties of the Al functionalized β-Bi2O3 nanofibers on the PI substrate. The electrical characterization was performed at a regular interval of 5 days for 30 days. The used sensor was cleaned gently after every use and stored in a vacuum desiccator at 2 °C. It should be noted that, ahead of every usage the buffer solution was dropped on the sensor and maintained for 20 min prior to the exposure of serotonin. The response of the serotonin biosensors displayed minimal change in response for over a period of 30 days, indicating excellent stability of the FET. Nevertheless, the interaction between the Al functionalized β-Bi2O3 nanofibers were intact and a stable functionality was obtained at room temperature. The performance of BioFET under strained (bent state) and relaxed state is given in SI. Fig. S4. When the fabricated device was subjected to tensile strain, the β- Bi2O3 nanofibers get separated from each other, resulting in availability of a lesser number of active sites interacting with the analyte, resulting in decrease of current. For small strains upto 15°, the deviation percentage of the responsivity is less than 5 % validating the robust nature of the polyimide tape-based gate dielectric. However, for strain values > 15°, the response of the sensor decreased drastically. The reproducibility of the BioFET was studied by recording the normalised current response for N = 5 different devices. The obtained responses of the FET devices were displayed in the Table S 3.1 in SI. The relative standard deviation indicated a minimal change in the normalised current by 3.01 %. The gate current of the BioFET device was calculated before and after bending as shown in Fig. S5. The change in drain current at the given gate voltage was found to be negligible, which can be attributed to the highly flexible nature of the gate dielectric i.e polyimide substrate, which can withstand the bending strain without the dielectric breaking down.This study validated the excellent reproducibility of the fabricated BioFET.
Table 1. Standard addition approach to determine Serotonin in human urine samples.

Sample name	Serotonin spiked	Serotonin recovered	Recovery (%)
R	–	–	–
R + S1	0.7 nM	0.71 nM	101
R + S2	1.2 nM	1.102 nM	98.1
R + S3	1.6 nM	1.69 nM	100.5
R + S4	2.3 nM	2.28 nM	99.1
Relative standard deviation (%)	–	–	1.33 %
Fig. 6
Download: Download high-res image (106KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 6. The flexibility studies of the fabricated FET with respect to bending cycles.

Table 2 summarizes the performance of the fabricated Al functionalized β-Bi2O3 BiOFET sensor with other reported metal oxide based non-enzymatic serotonin sensors. As per the authors knowledge, this is the first report on metal oxide modified FET based serotonin sensor. Previously, Au-RGO, WO3, Graphene – AV, Co3O4 modified GCE have been explored as active sensing materials for serotonin detection. Mahato et al. (2017) [28] reported Au-RGO-Nafionfor serotonin sensing wherein the comlex composite assists in the oxidation of serotonin molecules. However, it involves a highly sophisticated technique for synthesizing the nanocomposite and the high limit of detection is a serious drawback. Further, Gamma irradiated WO3 NPs [29] for serotonin sensing have severe environmental impact and the detection range was observed to be very narrow. All the other reported works are based electrochemical techniques which are time consuming and employ complicated sample preparation steps resulting in unspecified impurities and surface fouling effects. Commercially procured polyblend nanofiber mats [32] have been used as optical sensors for serotonin detection. However, the presence of natural inhibitors resulted in a narrow range of detection. The current work involves a low-cost, flexible and facile fabrication of Al functionalized β-Bi2O3 based first of its kind BioFET for wide range sensing of serotonin with a rapid response time (the time taken by the sensor to interact with the detectable number of serotonin molecules) of 0.8 s. The fabricated FET was used to accurately determine unknown concentrations of serotonin in real time urine samples. The FET device displayed an excellent reusability and stability for up to 30 days. The estimated cost of the sensor is $ 2.5 which makes it affordable and viable for commercialization to be used in healthcare related applications. Thus, the developed amperometric platform paves a new path for low cost, non-enzymatic detection of serotonin in biological samples for point-of care diagnostics.
Table 2. Comparison of the Al functionalized β-Bi2O3 nanofibers-based FET with previous reports on nanomaterials-based non-enzymatic serotonin sensors.

Material	Detection technique	Linear Dynamic Range (μM)	LOD* (nM)	Response time (sec)	Flexibility	Reference
Au-RGO	DPV	3 – 1000 M	38	–	No	[28]
Irradiated (GI-WO3) NPs	DPV	0.01–600	1.42	–	No	[29]
Graphene – AV- paper	DPV	1–10	290	–	No	[30]
RGO/Co3O4 nanocomposite	DPV	0.1–51	48.7	–	No	[31]
Polyblend Nanofiber Mat	Optical sensor	100- 1000	75	–	No	[32]
rGO-Co3O4	Amperometry	1-10	112.8	12.3	No	[33]
Non-ionic polymer film	Amperometry	0.02–1.56	0.4	10.2	Yes	[34]
G-g-PLA	Amperometry	0.1-100	80	10	Yes	[35]
In2O3	FET	0.1-0.0001	–	–	No	[36]
Al functionalized β-Bi2O3 nanofibers	FET	0.001–1	0.29 nM	0.8	Yes	[This work]
DPV* - Differential Pulse voltammetry, SWV* -Square wave voltammetry, AV - Lazzudur 2 K Auto Brilho; GI - gamma ray irradiated: graphene oxide grafted poly (lactic acid).
4. Conclusion
To summarize, this work reports a novel fabrication technique for synthesis of, multidimensional, high surface area Al functionalized β-Bi2O3 nanofibers-based FET for rapid and sensitive detection of serotonin. The synthesized Al functionalized β-Bi2O3 nanofibers was characterized by SEM, XRD, RAMAN and EDAX studies. The sensor exhibits excellent sensitivity of 51.64 μA/nM in the wide linear range of 10 nM to 1 μM of serotonin with a low limit of detection (LOD) of 0.29 nM. This enhanced analytical performance can be attributed to the excellent electrochemical properties of the distributed multidimensional surface of Al functionalized β-Bi2O3 nanofibers. The back gate induced electric field reduces the Debye screening effect to the obtain a reliable response, thus recording excellent sensitivity of the sensor. The practical applicability of the sensor was evaluated using selectivity towards serotonin in the presence of interfering analytes and by determining the unknown concentrations of serotonin in human urine samples. This method presented here, could be further explored to develop highly selective and sensitive flexible, wearable sensors for advanced healthcare applications.
Surface functionalized -Bi2O3 nanofibers based flexible, field-effect transistor-biosensor (BioFET) for rapid, label-free detection of serotonin in biological fluids
Sushmitha Veeralingam1, and Sushmee Badhulika1*
1Department of Electrical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Hyderabad
Hyderabad, 502285, India
*Corresponding author: E-mail: sbadh@iith.ac.in; Telephone: 040-23018443 Fax 04023016032
  
Figure S1. The real time photograph of the flexible BioFET 

Section S2: Parameters for DPV studies
To analyse the electroanalytical performance of Al functionalized -Bi2O3 nanofibers towards serotonin, Differential Pulse Voltammetry (DPV) studies were also performed. Following are the optimal diﬀerential pulse voltammetry (DPV) parameters used throughout the work: initial potential - 0 V; final potential – 0.8 V; increment potential - 0.001 V; amplitude- 0.05 V; pulse width - 0.2 s; pulse period -0.5 s. Before spiking serotonin, a low background current was observed whereas after spiking serotonin to the Phosphate buffer solution of pH 7.2, a distinguished oxidation peak at ∼0.29 V is observed in DPV. Upon increase in the concentration of serotonin, the anodic peak current increases. Here it is noteworthy to mention that the anodic peak current is observed due to the oxidation of serotonin. Thus, the drain to source voltage was set as 0.29 V for performing the electrical studies.

 
Figure S2. DPV studies for a) GCE; Al functionalized Bi2O3 in b) 0.1 M Phosphate buffer solution c) 10 nM of serotonin in 0.1 M Phosphate buffer solution d) 1 µM of serotonin in 0.1 M Phosphate buffer solution


Table S3.1 Reproducibility studies.

Device 	Response (∆I/I0) of the sensor towards 
D1	0.29
D2	0.27
D3	0.28
D4	0.28
D5	0.27
Relative standard deviation	
3.01 %





 
Figure S3. Stability and reusability test of FET biosensor at 10 nM of serotonin concentration over 1 month.

 



Figure S4. a) The responsivity studies under relaxed state and various strained state

 
Figure S5. Log Ids (Source-drain) – Vgs (gate-source) curve taken before and after bending the sensor

