Evaluation of site-selective drug effects on GABA receptors using nanovesicle-carbon nanotube hybrid devices
Author links open overlay panel
Inkyoung Park a 1
, 
Inwoo Yang b 1
, 
Youngtak Cho a
, 
Yoonji Choi a
, 
Junghyun Shin a
, 
Shashank Shekhar a
, 
Seung Hwan Lee b
, 
Seunghun Hong a

Show more

Add to Mendeley

Share

Cite
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bios.2021.113903
Get rights and content
Highlights
•
A nanovesicle-CNT hybrid device was developed to measure the drug effects on GABAA receptor activities.
•
The hybrid device can detect GABA down to 1 aM concentration.
•
Sensitivity differences between various subunit compositions of GABAA receptor were assessed by these hybrid devices.
•
The potency profiles of both antagonist and agonist drugs were evaluated by analyzing EC50 values.
Abstract
Site-selective drug effects on the ion-channel activities of γ-aminobutyric acid type A (GABAA) receptors are evaluated by using a nanovesicle-carbon nanotube hybrid device. Here, nanovesicles containing GABAA receptors are immobilized on the channel region of a carbon nanotube field-effect transistor. The receptor responses of this hybrid device to GABA are detected with a high sensitivity down to ∼1 aM even in the presence of other neurotransmitters. Further, sensitivity differences between two GABAA-receptor-subunit compositions of α5β2γ2 and α1β2γ2 are assessed by normalizing the dose-dependent responses obtained from these hybrid devices. Specifically, the GABA concentration that produces 50% of maximal response (EC50) is obtained as ∼10 pM for α5β2γ2 subunits and ∼1 nM for α1β2γ2 subunits of GABAA receptor. Significantly, the potency profiles of both antagonist and agonist of GABAA receptor can be evaluated by analyzing EC50 values in the presence and absence of those drugs. A competitive antagonist increases the EC50 value of GABA by binding to the same site as GABA, while an allosteric agonist reduces it by binding to a different site. These results indicate that this hybrid device can be a powerful tool for the evaluation of candidate drug substances modulating GABA-mediated neurotransmission.
Previous article in issue
Next article in issue
Keywords
Hybrid nanodeviceCarbon nanotube field-effect transistorNanovesicleGABA receptorDrug screening
1. Introduction
γ-aminobutyric acid type A (GABAA) receptor is a ligand-gated chloride-ion channel that regulates neurotransmission in a central nervous system. A malfunction of this receptor leads to neurological disorders such as epilepsy, anxiety, and insomnia(Chuang and Reddy, 2018; Jacob et al., 2008; Rudolph and Knoflach, 2011). Although benzodiazepines acting on GABAA receptors are widely-prescribed drugs for the treatment of these neurological disorders, they are used only limitedly due to side effects and addictiveness(Fischer et al., 2011; Rudolph and Knoflach, 2011). A GABAA receptor assembles into a pentamer with combinations of numerous different subunits (α1–α6, β1–β3, γ1–γ3, δ, ϵ, π, θ, and ρ1–ρ3) and has multiple ligand-binding sites on the interfaces of five subunits(Olsen and Sieghart, 2009). The limitation of benzodiazepines and the presence of versatile subunit combinations and multiple binding sites made GABAA receptors an important target for the development of new antipsychotic drugs. However, a lack of structural information on the binding sites has hindered the research on drug candidates which target GABAA receptors(Zhu et al., 2018). Even though previous studies based on affinity labeling, mutagenesis, and a homology model have provided indirect information on the supposed binding sites of many drug candidates(Chen et al., 2012; Desai et al., 2009; Ernst et al., 2003; Hosie et al., 2006; Padgett et al., 2007; Sieghart, 2015; Yip et al., 2013), it is still challenging to discover novel drugs acting on GABAA receptors. Recently, semisynthetic fluorescent biosensors for GABAA-receptor ligands were developed by utilizing a fluorescence quenching and recovery system combined with affinity-based chemical labeling reagents(Yamaura et al., 2016). These biosensors are suitable for high-throughput binding assays on drug candidates. However, ligand-binding assays cannot reveal the full potency profiles of drug candidates. Methods to detect ion-channel activities are essential to assess the efficacy of drug candidates. Although a patch clamp technique has been widely utilized as a standard method for the study of ion-channel activities(Knoflach et al., 2018; Verkman and Galietta, 2009), this conventional method has several drawbacks such as the need for advanced operating skill, labor-intensive procedures, and a high cost of automation.
Herein, we developed a carbon nanotube field-effect transistor (CNT-FET) hybridized with nanovesicles containing GABAA receptors to evaluate drug effects on ion-channel activities of GABAA receptors. In this work, CNT-FET devices were fabricated via microfabrication processes(Kim et al., 2009, 2012; Lee et al., 2006; Park et al., 2012), and then nanovesicles containing GABAA receptors were immobilized on CNT channel regions coated with poly-D-lysine. GABA binding on GABAA receptors caused 
 influxes into nanovesicles and the consequent membrane hyperpolarization of nanovesicles, which resulted in the change of CNT channel conductance. Thus, we could electrically monitor GABA-mediated changes in transmembrane potential by using this nanovesicle-carbon nanotube hybrid device. This hybrid device allowed us to selectively detect GABA responses with a high sensitivity down to 1 aM even in the presence of other neurotransmitters, which indicated a better detection limit than those of conventional patch clamp techniques (∼0.1 μM)(Hanson and Czajkowski, 2008; Knoflach et al., 2018; Wafford et al., 1993). By normalizing the GABA-dose-dependent responses of nanovesicle-CNT hybrid devices with GABAA receptors including two different subunit compositions of α5β2γ2 and α1β2γ2, we could show that the sensitivity of α5β3γ2 combination was higher than that of α1β2γ2 combination, which was in a good agreement with previously reported data(Knoflach et al., 2018). The normalized responses of the hybrid devices were analyzed with the empirical Hill equation. Thereby, we could obtain the concentration of GABA that produces 50% of maximal response (EC50) at ∼10 pM for α5β2γ2 combination and ∼1 nM for α1β2γ2 combination. Note that the estimated EC50 values were much smaller than previously reported values using live cells including GABAA receptors (10–100 μM)(Hanson and Czajkowski, 2008; Knoflach et al., 2018; Wafford et al., 1993). Presumably, the smaller size of nanovesicles than live cells resulted in a significant gating effect to CNT-FET transducers even with small amounts of 
 influxes. Significantly, we evaluated the effects of a competitive antagonist drug, bicuculline, and an allosteric agonist drug, etomidate. The EC50 values of GABA in the presence of bicuculline and etomidate in this hybrid assay were two orders of magnitude higher and lower than the EC50 values of GABA without drugs, respectively. Presumably, bicuculline bound to the same site as GABA, which competitively inhibited GABA-binding affinity. Etomidate bound to a different site from that of GABA, which enhanced GABA-evoked 
 influxes. These results show that this hybrid device can be used to evaluate the potency profiles of both antagonist and agonist drugs. This work could open up efficient ways to assess the effects of various drug candidates binding to GABAA receptors.
2. Materials and methods
2.1. Materials
Semiconducting 99% single-walled carbon nanotubes (swCNTs) were purchased from NanoIntegris, Inc. (Canada). γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA), bicuculine, etomidate, cytochalasin B, Dulbecco's phosphate buffered saline (DPBS), protease inhibitor cocktail, 1,2-dichlorobenzene, octadecyltrichlorosilane, and poly-D-lysine were purchased from Sigma Aldrich (USA). Dulbecco's Modified Eagle Medium (DMEM) and fetal bovine serum were purchased from Biowest (France). Penicillin-streptomycin serum was purchased from Gibco (USA). Lipofectamine 3000 was purchased from Invitrogen (USA).
2.2. Cell culture and nanovesicle production
Human embryonic kidney-293 (HEK-293) cells were cultured in DMEM with 10% fetal bovine serum and 1% penicillin-streptomycin at 37 °C in a 5% CO2 atmosphere. The cells were transfected with three kinds of pCMV6-Entry vectors containing γ-aminobutyric acid type A (GABAA) receptor subunits (α1:β2:γ2 = 1:1:1 or α5:β2:γ2 = 1:1:1) by using Lipofectamine 3000 and additionally cultured for 48 h. Then, the HEK-293 cells containing GABAA receptors were harvested. Afterward, nanovesicles containing GABAA receptors were produced by 300 rpm agitation of the cells with 10 μg/mL cytochalasin B(Lee et al., 2015; Pick et al., 2005; Shin et al., 2020). Cell debris was removed by centrifugation (1000 g, 10 min). The nanovesicles were concentrated in DPBS containing protease inhibitor cocktail through centrifugation (15,000 g, 30 min). For control experiments, HEK-293 cells were transfected with mock pCMV6-Entry vector containing no receptor gene (empty vector) by using Lipofectamine 3000. Mock nanovesicles without GABAA receptors were produced from those parent cells via the same procedure described for nanovesicles containing GABAA receptors.
2.3. Western blot analysis
The cell and nanovesicle membranes containing GABAA receptors were disrupted via pulse sonication (2 s on/off cycles for 2 min). Then, the membrane fractions were collected by centrifugation (12,000 g, 30 min). Membrane proteins were isolated from the membrane fractions via polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis. For the detection of transfected GABAA-receptor subunits among membrane proteins, a rabbit antibody to α1 subunit (Abcam, USA), a mouse antibody to β2 subunit (Sigma-Aldrich, USA), a rabbit antibody to γ2 subunit (Abcam, USA), and a mouse antibody to α5 subunit (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, USA) were used as primary antibodies. As secondary antibodies, horseradish peroxidase (HRP)-conjugated antibodies (AbFrontier, Korea) were used. A western HRP substrate (Millipore, USA) was used to perform Western blot.
2.4. Membrane potential assay
The cells or nanovesicles were incubated in a 96-well plate with a loading buffer containing a fluorescent dye of FLIPR membrane potential assay kits (Molecular Devices, USA) at 37 °C for 30 min. The changes in fluorescence intensity upon the addition of a GABA solution were observed by using a microplate leader (BMG Labtech, Germany)(Joesch et al., 2008; Liu et al., 2008). For the driving force of 
 movement toward the outside of membranes, a 
-free buffer was used to dissolve GABA.
2.5. CNT-FET device fabrication
To prepare a CNT suspension, a 0.05 mg/mL mixture of swCNTs and 1,2-dichlorobenzene was sonicated for 4 h. An octadecyltrichlorosilane monolayer with hydrophobic terminal groups was patterned on the SiO2 substrate via photolithography as reported previously(Jin et al., 2013). Then, the patterned substrate with the octadecyltrichlorosilane monolayer was immerged in the CNT suspension for 20 s. Then, the excess CNT suspension was washed out with 1,2-dichlorobenzene. Source, drain, and floating electrodes were fabricated on the substrate via photolithography and thermal evaporation. The floating electrodes were 10 μm wide and 200 μm long, and exposed CNT channels were 3 μm wide and 170 μm long. Except the channel region including the floating electrodes and exposed CNT channels, the surface of substrate was passivated with a photoresist layer. In order to completely harden the passivation layer and to remove the chemicals that could damage biomolecules, the substrate with the passivation layer was incubated at 200 °C for 12 h.
2.6. Nanovesicle immobilization on a CNT-FET device
Poly-D-lysine was dissolved in distilled water, and the solution was diluted to prepare a 0.1 mg/mL working solution. Then, CNT channel regions of a CNT-FET device were covered with the working solution and incubated at 37 °C for 1 h, and the device was rinsed with water and dried at room temperature. After the nanovesicle production process, the concentration of total protein contained in the nanovesicle suspension was measured by a bicinchoninic acid assay kit (Pierce, IL, USA). Then, the nanovesicle suspension was diluted with a fresh DPBS solution to the same protein concentration at each device preparation step. Afterward, the diluted nanovesicle suspension was dropped onto the channel region, the device was incubated at 4 °C for 3 h, and loosely bound nanovesicles were removed by, at least, three times of DPBS washes before electrical measurements.
2.7. Electrical measurements
Before each electrical measurement, GABA solutions with various concentrations were prepared in a fresh DPBS solution via consecutive dilution steps. The nanovesicle-immobilized CNT-FET hybrid device was connected to probe electrodes of a semiconductor analyzer (Keithley 4200, Keithley Instruments, USA), and a fresh DPBS solution was placed on the channel region for physiological environments. A liquid gate bias was applied at a negative voltage around −0.5 V causing the highest reduction of source-drain currents, and a source-drain bias voltage was retained at 0.2 V. Afterward, source-drain currents were measured upon the addition of GABA solutions with various concentrations.
2.8. SEM imaging of a nanovesicle-CNT hybrid device
The morphology of CNT networks and nanovesicles on a CNT-FET device was visualized by using a field-emission scanning electron microscope (FE-SEM) (SUPRA 55VP, Carl Zeiss, Germany). To maintain the structure of nanovesicles immobilized on the CNT channel region, membrane lipids were fixed with an OsO4 solution before SEM imaging.
2.9. Size distribution and zeta potential of nanovesicles
The size distribution and zeta potential of nanovesicles were estimated by dynamic light scattering (DLS) and electrophoretic light scattering (ELS) measurements using Zetasizer Nano ZS90 (Malvern, Germany). Nanovesicles were dispersed in a DPBS solution at a concentration of 5 μg/mL. Disposable capillary cell (DTS1070, Malvern, Germany) with a sample volume of 80 μL was used for DLS and ELS measurements.
3. Results and discussion
3.1. Structure of a CNT-FET hybrid device with nanovesicles containing GABAA receptors
Fig. 1 shows a schematic diagram describing a CNT-FET device hybridized with nanovesicles containing GABAA receptors. Detailed fabrication process is provided in Materials and Methods section. We also provided the schematic diagram showing the fabrication process of nanovesicle-CNT-FET hybrid device as a supplementary material (Fig. S1 in Supplementary Material). In this work, single-walled carbon nanotubes (swCNTs) with more than 99% of semiconducting ones were selectively assembled in the channel regions on a SiO2 substrate via a surface-directed assembly method. Then, source, drain, and floating electrodes were fabricated via photolithography and thermal evaporation(Kim et al., 2009, 2012; Lee et al., 2006; Park et al., 2012). Afterward, except for floating electrodes and CNT channel region, source-drain electrodes were passivated with photoresist layers. Finally, nanovesicles containing GABAA receptors were immobilized on the channel regions coated with poly-D-lysine, a charge enhancer. The entire preparation steps of the nanovesicle-CNT-FET hybrid device were performed under the same conditions and protocol, resulting in identical dimensions of the floating electrodes and CNT channel region to which the nanovesicles were immobilized. When GABA molecules bound to their binding sites on pentameric GABAA receptors, 
 ions flowed into the nanovesicles through the ion channels of the receptors, which resulted in membrane hyperpolarization(Rudolph and Knoflach, 2011). This led to the change of CNT channel conductance, allowing us to monitor GABA-mediated changes in transmembrane potential.
Fig. 1
Download: Download high-res image (392KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 1. Schematic diagram depicting a nanovesicle-CNT-FET hybrid device. A CNT-FET device was fabricated via a surface-directed assembly method and microfabrication processes. Then, nanovesicles containing GABAA receptors composed of α5β2γ2 or α1β2γ2 subunits were immobilized on the CNT channel region coated with poly-D-lysine. GABA molecules bound to their binding sites on GABAA receptors, which resulted in 
 influxes into the membrane. A change in electric field caused by the 
 influxes induced a change in the CNT channel conductance.

3.2. Characterization of a CNT-FET hybrid device with nanovesicles containing GABAA receptors
The expression of GABAA receptors including two different subunit compositions of α5β2γ2 and α1β2γ2 in cell-derived nanovesicles were verified by Western blot analyses using antibodies against those subunit proteins (Fig. 2a and Fig. S2a in Supplementary Material). The red arrows in Fig. 2a indicate the molecular weights of α5β2γ2 subunits, respectively. Specific bands from both cells and cell-derived nanovesicles correspond to α5β2γ2 subunits of GABAA receptor. These results show that each GABAA-receptor subunit was expressed in cell-derived nanovesicles successfully (Chen et al., 2012; Pettingill et al., 2015; Yamaura et al., 2016). In addition, the Western blot analysis for HEK-293 cells transfected with mock pCMV6-Entry vector (empty vector) confirmed that those parent cells did not contain GABA-specific genes (Fig. S3 in Supplementary Material).
Fig. 2
Download: Download high-res image (939KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 2. Expression of GABAA receptors in cell-derived nanovesicles and immobilization of nanovesicles on the channel region of CNT-FET. (a) Western blot analyses of α5, β2, and γ2 subunit proteins of GABAA receptor in HEK-293 cells and cell-derived nanovesicles. The red arrows indicate the specific bands corresponding to the molecular weights of α5, β2, and γ2 subunit proteins. (b) FLIPR membrane potential assay to investigate whether GABAA receptors maintained their functionalities when isolated into nanovesicles. The addition of a GABA solution (100 mM) led to much higher increase of a fluorescence intensity in the case of nanovesicles with GABAA receptors than those without GABAA receptors. The results are provided as mean ± SD. (c) FE-SEM image of bare CNT networks on a CNT-FET device. (d) FE-SEM images of nanovesicles immobilized on the channel region of CNT-FET. The diameters of nanovesicles immobilized on CNT networks and floating electrodes ranged from 200 nm to 400 nm. (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the Web version of this article.)

Fig. 2b and Fig. S2b (Supplementary Material) show the results of membrane potential assays, which was carried out to investigate whether GABA-activated membrane hyperpolarization could also occur in nanovesicles containing GABAA-receptor subunits of α5β2γ2 and α1β2γ2, respectively. Here, nanovesicles with or without GABAA receptors were incubated in a well plate with a fluorescent dye of a commercially available kit for membrane potential assays. Then, real-time changes in fluorescence intensity were monitored by using a microplate leader. Here, we repeated the measurement by more than three times and provided a graph of mean values with their standard deviations as error bars. After the addition of a GABA solution (100 mM) into the well including nanovesicles with GABAA receptors, the fluorescence intensity (red lines) increased rapidly over the first 20 s and gradually saturated to a plateau phase. On the otherhand, in the control experiments without GABA addition, the fluorescence intensity did not change for both nanovesicles containing GABAA receptors and mock nanovesicles (purple and blue lines). It also should be mentioned that the addition of a GABA solution (100 mM) slightly increase the fluorescence intensity (black lines) in the case of mock nanovesicles without GABAA receptors. It was presumably due to the artifact signals caused by change in the concentration of extra-vesicle quencher included in the used assay kit to reduce background fluorescence(May et al., 2010; Tay et al., 2019). Nevertheless, the fluorescence increase was much higher in nanovesicles with GABAA receptors than that by mock nanovesicles beyond the range of error bars. These results show that the binding of GABA molecules to GABAA receptors caused 
 influxes into the nanovesicles containing GABAA receptors and the consequent membrane hyperpolarization. In these nanovesicle experiments, the recovery of fluorescence intensity to the baseline was not observed, possibly due to the lack of 
/ 
 cotransporters which are essential for the restoration of the 
 concentrations inside and outside the membrane(Joesch et al., 2008; Liu et al., 2008). We could obtain a similar result with nanovesicles containing GABAA-receptor subunits of α1β2γ2 (Fig. S2b in Supplementary Material). These results suggest that GABAA receptors were successfully incorporated in a cell membrane and maintained their functionalities when isolated into nanovesicles.
Fig. 2c and d show the field-emission scanning electron microscopy (FE-SEM) images of CNT networks on a CNT-FET device and those of nanovesicles immobilized on the CNT channel region including floating electrodes, respectively. The detailed immobilization process using poly-D-lysine is provided in Methods section. To maintain the structure of nanovesicles during FE-SEM imaging, membrane lipids were fixed with an osmium tetroxide (OsO4) solution. Also, OsO4 molecules which bound onto phospholipid head groups created a high electron scattering rate without any metal layer coating. Fig. 2d shows the uniform distribution of nanovesicles immobilized on swCNTs and floating electrodes. The diameters of nanovesicles ranged from 200 nm to 400 nm, which is consistent with the size distribution estimated by dynamic light scattering measurement of nanovesicles dispersed in a DPBS solution (Fig. S4 in Supplementary Material). Also, the zeta potential of nanovesicles was estimated to be −11 mV by electrophoretic light scattering. These results indicate that nanovesicles with a uniform size and a negative charge were successfully immobilized on a CNT channel region. It also should be mentioned that, though the number density of nanovesicles on the sensor surface could vary slightly, we found that the sensor devices provided proper sensing signals with ∼4.4 nanovesicles per square micrometer area. Considering the effective sensing area of ∼ 
 on our sensor chip (i.e., floating electrodes and CNT channel region), mean number of nanovesicles in a hybrid device was ∼45,000.
3.3. GABA detection performance via nanovesicle-CNT-FET hybrid devices
Fig. 3a shows the liquid gate profiles of a nanovesicle-CNT-FET hybrid device before and after a GABA introduction. After the nanovesicle immobilization process, a fresh DPBS solution was placed on the channel region of a hybrid device. To investigate liquid gate profiles of the hybrid device, a liquid gate bias (VLG) was applied into a DPBS solution above the nanovesicle-immobilized channel region via an Ag/AgCl electrode. The source-drain currents (ISD) were measured while VLG was swept from −0.6 V to 0.6 V with a source-drain bias of 0.2 V. The source-drain currents decreased with increasing gate voltages, indicating a p-type semiconducting property. Note that, after 1 μM GABA addition to this hybrid device, the source-drain currents were decreased at a negative gate voltage region. This result could be explained by the combination of electrostatic gating and Schottky barrier effects. GABA-evoked 
 influxes into nanovesicles resulted in more uncompensated positive charges outside the membrane and more uncompensated negative charges inside the membrane, which is called hyperpolarization. The uncompensated positive charges which were physically located in the immediate vicinity of the membrane induced electrostatic gating effects onto CNT networks and modulated local work function of floating electrodes and the consequent band alignment. Presumably, the obserbed decrease of source-drain currents at a negative gate voltage region arose from the combination of a curve shift toward negative gate voltages and a slope reduction. The curve shift was attributed to electrostatic gating effects of the positive charges onto CNT networks, and the slope reduction was due to the Schottky barrier height modulation caused by changes in local work function of floating electrodes(Heller et al., 2008; Minot et al., 2007). These results imply that GABA-evoked membrane hyperpolarization would lead to the decrease of CNT channel conductance with a negative liquid gate bias.
Fig. 3
Download: Download high-res image (542KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 3. Characteristic responses of a nanovesicle-CNT-FET hybrid device to GABA. (a) Liquid gate profiles of a nanovesicle-CNT-FET hybrid device before and after a GABA introduction. (b) Real-time responses of a CNT-FET hybrid device at increasing GABA concentrations. The channel conductance decreased from the addition of 1 aM GABA solution. (c) GABA-dose-dependent responses of CNT-FET with GABAA-receptor subunits of α5β2γ2 and α1β2γ2. The signals were obtained by normalizing |ΔG/G0| with respect to |ΔG/G0|max. The measurements were repeatedly carried out with multiple devices to obtain average values and standard deviations. The normalized signals were fitted by the Hill equation, with EC50 values as ∼10 pM for the α5β2γ2 combination and ∼1 nM for the α1β2γ2 combination. (d) Real-time responses of a nanovesicle-CNT-FET hybrid device to various neurotransmitters. A drastic decrease in current was occurred only with a GABA addition.

Fig. 3b shows the real-time responses of a CNT-FET device hybridized with nanovesicles containing GABAA-receptor subunits of α5β2γ2 to GABA solutions. For each electrical measurement, an 18 μL droplet of fresh DPBS solution was placed on the channel region of a hybrid device. Then, source-drain currents were measured in real-time while adding GABA solutions. First, 2 μL of GABA solution with 10−17 M concentration was added onto the buffer region, resulting in 20 μL of GABA solution with 10−18 M concentration. Then, GABA solutions with increasing concentrations by the factor of 100 were consecutively added each time. The added volumes of GABA solutions with increasing concentrations were calculated by considering the increased total volume of buffer. During the measurement, a liquid gate bias was used at a negative value around −0.5 V for the largest change of source-drain currents, and a source-drain bias was retained at 0.2 V. Here, the detection signal was defined as the relative change of CNT channel conductance (ΔG/G0) at a given GABA concentration. The introduction of GABA solutions first led to a sharp spike-like fluctuation, and then the sensor signals were stabilized to the decreased values of ΔG/G0 with a dose-dependent manner. The spike noise was probably due to the physical vibration of the sample solution on the device during the introduction of GABA solutions as reported previously(Yang et al., 2017). It should be mentioned that the detachment of nanovesicles during the measurement could induce a sharp decrease in electric currents over orders of magnitude, which allowed us to rule out possible artifacts in our sensor signals. To prevent the detachment, GABA solutions with increasing concentration were softly added onto the channel region during experiments. Each stabilized value of ΔG/G0 at a given GABA concentration represented an equilibrium state established between the concentrations of receptor-bound and free GABA molecules. Significantly, the detection signals decreased from the addition of 1 aM GABA solution. Note that a recent study using an automated patch clamp system with live cells including GABAA receptors showed the limit of detection (LOD) down to 0.1 μM GABA concentration(Knoflach et al., 2018), indicating a high sensitivity of this hybrid device compared with previous methods(Hanson and Czajkowski, 2008; Knoflach et al., 2018; Wafford et al., 1993). The high sensitivity of our hybrid device can be attributed to the smaller size of nanovesicles (diameter ∼300 nm) than those of an individual cell used in previous methods, a large number of nanovesicles on a hybrid device (# ∼45,000), and the high signal transduction efficiency of CNT-FET device. On the other hand, conventional methods such as a patch clamp technique usually relied on a measurement on a rather large individual cell using metal electrodes or pipettes. Considering the number of nanovesicles on a hybrid device (# ∼45,000) and the number of GABA molecules included in 20 μL of 1 aM GABA solution (# ∼12), the number of nanovesicles per GABA molecule in 20 μL GABA solution of 1 aM was 
 in our hybrid device. It also should be mentioned that the recovery of source-drain currents was not observed in our measurements using this nanovesicle-CNT hybrid device. Presumably, 
/ 
 cotransporters did not exist in the nanovesicles, and, thus, 
 concentration in nanovesicles couldn't be restored, which was in agreement with the results of membrane potential assays in Fig. 2b. We could obtain a similar response with a CNT-FET device hybridized with nanovesicles containing GABAA-receptor subunits of α1β2γ2 (Fig. S5 in Supplementary Material). Also, we performed a control experiment using a sensor device with mock nanovesicles and obtained null responses (Fig. S6 in Supplementary Material). It supports that our sensor signals were originated from the activities of GABAA receptors on the nanovesicles. These results show that nanovesicle-CNT-FET hybrid devices could allow us to detect GABA-evoked ion-channel activities in nanovesicles with a high sensitivity and without a fast desensitization.
Fig. 3c shows the normalized dose-dependent responses of CNT-FET devices hybridized with nanovesicles containing GABAA-receptor subunits of α5β2γ2 and α1β2γ2 to GABA solutions with increasing concentrations. In our hybrid devices, the dimensions of sensing area (i.e., floating electrodes and CNT channel region) were identical. Nevertheless, the expression level of GABAA receptors, the size distribution of nanovesicles, and the number density of nanovesicles on the sensing area could vary slightly in each device. These variations could result in a different maximal amplitude of detection signal for each device. Thus, the relative conductance changes (|ΔG/G0|) of devices were re-normalized with respect to maximal values (|ΔG/G0|max). The normalized signals at a given GABA concentration were measured with multiple devices to acquire average values and standard deviations. The signals increased with increasing GABA concentrations and saturated at a high concentration condition. The LOD of our device was 1 aM of GABA concentration and its dynamic range was from 1 aM to 10 mM. The responses of nanovesicle-CNT-FET hybrid devices with two different subunit compositions indicated that the sensitivity of α5β2γ2 combination was higher than that of α1β2γ2 combination. This result was consistent with previously reported data(Knoflach et al., 2018). It was presumably due to the higher GABA affinity of α5-β2 interfaces than that of α1-β2 interfaces, since GABA-binding sites were supposed to locate on α-β interfaces(Rudolph and Knoflach, 2011; Yamaura et al., 2016; Zhu et al., 2018). Meanwhile, various methods for detecting GABA molecules have been reported so far(El-Said et al., 2020; Hossain et al., 2018; Huang et al., 2017; Lee et al., 2019; Monge-Acuña and Fornaguera-Trías, 2009; Prasad et al., 2013; Wang and Muthuswamy, 2008). The comparison of different methods using various recognition elements for GABA detection is presented in Fig. S7 (Supplementary Material). Our sensor device based on GABAA receptors exhibited a higher sensitivity than previous methods based on other recognition elements. Another advantage can be that our device can be utilized to measure GABA-evoked ion-channel activities of GABAA receptors, which is the main purpose of our works. In addition, our hybrid device could be used to evaluate GABA sensitivities of GABAA receptors with two different subunit compositions in terms of ion-channel activity. On the other hand, previous methods based on more stable recognition elements like polymer structures should be advantageous over our sensors in terms of portability.
The dose-dependent responses of CNT-FET hybrid devices could be analyzed by the empirical Hill equation(Neubig et al., 2003). Previous works reported that the normalized dose-dependent responses N of a CNT-FET based biosensor could be characterized as follows(Pham Ba et al., 2017):
(1)
where C, EC50 and n are GABA concentration, the GABA concentration producing 50% of maximal response, and a Hill coefficient, respectively. Fitting the normalized dose-dependent responses with Equation (1), we could estimate the EC50 values (
) as 
 for α5β2γ2 subunits of GABAA receptor and 
 for α1β2γ2 subunits of GABAA receptor. The calculated EC50 values were much smaller than previously reported values (10–100 μM) measured by conventional patch clamp techniques and live cells with GABAA receptors.(Hanson and Czajkowski, 2008; Knoflach et al., 2018; Wafford et al., 1993) Note that, the potency of an agonist is dependent on experimental conditions such as used cells, a level of receptor expression, a type of measurement methods, and a signal transduction efficiency.(Neubig et al., 2003) In this work, since nanovesicles were much smaller than live cells, small amounts of 
 influxes into the nanovesicles could considerably enhance their electrical potential, which resulted in a remarkable gating effect on the CNT-FET transducers. Similar results have also been reported previously in other nanovesicle-carbon nanotube hybrid devices.(Jin et al., 2013) The results show that one could achieve enhanced sensitivities and reduced EC50 values of ligands in this nanovesicle-CNT-FET hybrid assay. Using this hybrid device, the potency profiles of various drugs could be evaluated by comparing the EC50 values of GABA in the presence and absence of drugs.
Fig. 3d shows the real-time response of a nanovesicle-CNT-FET hybrid device to different neurotransmitters. Here, we successively added the 100 μM solutions of acetylcholine, glutamate, and 1 μM GABA solution onto the hybrid device during electrical measurements. Acetylcholine and glutamate are major neurotransmitters acting on different receptors from GABA receptors. A distinct decrease in electric currents was observed only with a GABA addition. These results clearly show that the CNT-FET hybrid device could discriminate GABA even in the presence of other neurotransmitters with a high selectivity.
3.4. Evaluation of site-selective drug effects on GABAA-receptor activities via nanovesicle-CNT-FET hybrid devices
Further, we extended the panel of selectivity to interfering molecules with GABA activities beyond different neurotransmitters. To date, a number of GABA analogues and GABAA-receptor ligands that bind to various sites on pentameric GABAA receptor and modulate GABA activities are known and still being discovered. To demonstrate that our hybrid device can discriminate the site-selective effect of ligands, we chose a competitive antagonist that binds to the same site as GABA and an allosteric agonist that binds to a different site. Fig. 4a illustrates the schematic diagram depicting the binding sites of two different drugs which modulate GABA-mediated 
 influxes. In this work, we evaluated the effects of bicuculline and etomidate which were known as a competitive antagonist and an allosteric agonist of GABAA receptor, respectively(Belelli et al., 1997; Horne et al., 1992; Yamaura et al., 2016; Zhu et al., 2018). Bicuculline competitively binds to the same site as GABA, which leads to the inhibition of GABA binding to GABAA receptors. On the other hand, etomidate is known to bind to a different site, and the binding of etomidate actually enhances GABA-evoked 
 influxes. Since the modulated amounts of 
 influxes resulted in the conductance changes of CNT channels, the potency profiles of different drugs acting on GABAA receptors could be electrically assessed by using our hybrid devices.
Fig. 4
Download: Download high-res image (575KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 4. Evaluation of site-selective drug effects on ion-channel activities of GABAA receptors. (a) Schematic depicting the binding sites of two different drugs modulating GABA-evoked 
 influxes. (b) Normalized dose-dependent responses of CNT-FET hybrid devices to GABA in the presence and absence of competitive antagonist, bicuculine with 100 μM. The EC50 value was shifted to higher GABA concentration by two orders of magnitude in the presence of bicuculine. (c) Normalized dose-dependent responses of CNT-FET hybrid devices to GABA in the presence and absence of allosteric agonist, etomidate with 100 μM. The EC50 value was shifted to lower GABA concentration by two orders of magnitude in the presence of etomidate. (b, c) The signals were obtained by normalizing |ΔG/G0| with respect to |ΔG/G0|max. The normalized signals were fitted by the Hill equation.

Fig. 4b shows the normalized dose-dependent responses of CNT-FET hybrid devices with nanovesicles containing GABAA-receptor subunits of α1β2γ2 to GABA with and without bicuculine. Here, nanovesicles immobilized on CNT channel regions were incubated with a DPBS solution with or without 100 μM bicuculine. Then, the responses of individual hybrid devices to the addition of GABA solutions with different concentrations were measured. Each data point was obtained by normalizing |ΔG/G0| with respect to |ΔG/G0|max, and the normalized responses of the hybrid devices were analyzed by fitting them with the Hill equation. The normalized signals in the presence of bicuculine were shifted toward a high concentration region, which was consistent with previously reported data(Horne et al., 1992; Zhu et al., 2018). The EC50 value of GABA in the presence of bicuculine estimated in our nanovesicle-CNT-FET hybrid assay was 
, which was two orders of magnitude higher than that of GABA without bicuculine (
). This result shows that the competitive binding of bicuculine to GABA-binding sites dramatically reduced the affinity between GABA and GABAA receptor.
Fig. 4c shows the normalized dose-dependent responses of CNT-FET hybrid devices with nanovesicles containing GABAA-receptor subunits α1β2γ2 to GABA in the presence and absence of etomidate. In this case, after nanovesicles on CNT channel regions were incubated with a buffer solution with or without 100 μM etomidate, the responses of the devices to GABA addition were measured. Each data point at a given concentration was obtained by normalizing |ΔG/G0| with respect to |ΔG/G0|max, and the normalized responses were analyzed by the Hill equation. In the presence of etomidate, the normalized signals were shifted toward a low concentration region, in agreement with previous studies on allosteric agonists(Belelli et al., 1997; Yamaura et al., 2016). The EC50 value of GABA in the presence of etomidate estimated in this hybrid assay was 
, which was two orders of magnitude lower than that of GABA without etomidate (
). This result shows that the simultaneous binding of GABA and etomidate onto GABAA receptors significantly enhanced 
 influxes into nanovesicles. It should be noted that since this hybrid device could successfully evaluate the potency profiles of both antagonist and agonist, it can be a powerful method for the screening of new drugs to modulate ion-channel activities.
4. Conclusion
We have successfully evaluated the potency profiles of GABA-related drugs in a site-selective manner by using nanovesicle-CNT-FET hybrid devices containing GABAA receptors. Here, the functional activities of GABAA receptors incorporated in nanovesicles were verified via a membrane potential assay. Then, the nanovesicles were immobilized on the channel region of CNT-FET devices. Using this hybrid device, we could detect GABA responses with a high sensitivity down to 1 aM even in the presence of other neurotransmitters. Further, we could evaluate the sensitivities of different subunit combinations by normalizing the dose-dependent responses of the hybrid devices with GABAA receptors of two different subunit compositions. By fitting the dose-dependent responses of the hybrid devices with the Hill equation, we could obtain the EC50 value of GABA as ∼10 pM for α5β2γ2 subunits and ∼1 nM for α1β2γ2 subunits. Importantly, we have demonstrated both antagonism and agonism of GABAA receptor by comparing the EC50 values of GABA in the presence and absence of drugs. In the presence of competitive antagonists, the EC50 value was shifted to a high GABA concentration region by two orders of magnitude. On the other hand, in the presence of allosteric agonists, the EC50 value was shifted to a low GABA concentration region by similar orders. Since this hybrid device allows one to evaluate the potency profiles of drug candidates, it can be a powerful tool for pharmacological research and drug screening applications.
Supplementary Material
Evaluation of Site-Selective Drug Effects on GABA Receptors using Nanovesicle-Carbon Nanotube Hybrid Devices 
Inkyoung Park‡1), Inwoo Yang‡2), Youngtak Cho1), Yoonji Choi1), Junghyun Shin1), Shashank Shekhar1), Seung Hwan Lee*2), Seunghun Hong*1)
1)Department of Physics and Astronomy, Seoul National University, Seoul 08826, Republic of Korea
2)Department of Bionano Engineering, Center for Bionano Intelligence Education and Research, Hanyang University, Ansan, 15588, Republic of Korea

*Corresponding author. E-mail: seunghun@snu.ac.kr (S. Hong) vincero78@gmail.com (S. H. Lee)
 
Figure S1
 
Figure S1. Schematic diagram showing the fabrication of nanovesicle-CNT-FET hybrid device. 

 
Figure S2
 
Figure S2. Expression of GABAA-receptor subunits of α1β2γ2 in cell-derived nanovesicles. (a) Western blot analyses of GABAA-receptor subunits of α1β2γ2 expression in HEK-293 cells and cell-derived nanovesicles. The red arrows indicate the specific bands corresponding to the molecular weights of α1, β2, and γ2 subunit proteins. (b) FLIPR membrane potential assay to investigate whether GABAA-receptor subunits of α1β2γ2 maintained their functionalities when isolated into nanovesicles. The addition of a GABA solution (100 mM) resulted in much larger increase of a fluorescence intensity in the case of nanovesicles with GABAA receptors than those without GABAA receptors. The results are provided as mean ± SD.

 
Figure S3
 
Figure S3. Western blot analyses of α5, β2, and γ2 subunit proteins of GABAA receptor in HEK-293 cells. For control experiments, HEK-293 cells were further transfected with mock pCMV6-Entry vector containing no receptor gene (empty vector).

 
Figure S4
 
Figure S4. Dynamic light scattering (DLS) measurement of nanovesicles containing GABAA receptors.

 
Figure S5
 
Figure S5. Real-time responses of a CNT-FET hybrid device with GABAA-receptor subunits of α1β2γ2 to the addition of GABA solutions. The CNT channel conductance decreased with increasing GABA concentrations.
 
Figure S6
 
Figure S6. Real-time responses of a CNT-FET hybrid device with mock nanovesicles to the addition of GABA solutions. The CNT channel conductance remained constant while the GABA concentration increased.

 
Figure S7
  
Figure S7. Comparison of LODs among different methods for GABA detection with various recognition elements.

 
Figure S8
 
Figure S8. Full-length western blot bands corresponding to Figure 2a. Black dashed lines represent the cropping areas.
 
Figure S9
 
Figure S9. Full-length western blot bands corresponding to Figure S2a. Black dashed lines represent the cropping areas.
