Fig. 1. (a)–(c)SGFETfabrication process (d) real image of a grapheneSGFETdevice (e) schematic diagram of a graphene SGFET and (f) sequentialanodizationsetup for the potential scans.

Fig. 2.(a) The transfer characteristics of grapheneSGFETand (b) VDIRACshift afteranodizationwith a voltage of 0.6 V to 1.3 V with a step of 0.1 V.

Fig. 3.(a)Raman spectrabefore and after anodization at 1.3 V on a graphene monolayer using 633 nmexcitation laser. The D and G peak are at ~1340 cm−1, ~1580 cm−1, respectively (b) CV for anodized graphene SGFET in 1.0 mM Fe(CN)63−/4−in 1 M KCl with scan rate of 100 mV/ s.

Table 1. ID/IGratio before and after sequential anodization at 1.3 V and the percentage (%) of defect increase.

Fig. 4. The transfer characteristics of graphene SGFET measured in different pHbuffer solutions, a(i) before anodization and b(i) after anodization. pH sensitivities measured at low and high pH region a(ii) before anodization and b(ii) after anodization.

Fig. 5. pH sensitivities of graphene SGFET (a) before anodicoxidationand after anodization at (b) 0.9 V (c) 1.3 V (d) 1.5 V (e) 1.7 V and (f) 1.9 V.

Table 2. Anodization time recorded for each potential scan from 0.6 to 1.9 V.

Cookies are used by this site.Cookie Settings

All content on this site: Copyright ©2025or its licensors and contributors. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. For all open access content, the relevant licensing terms apply.

These cookies are necessary for the website to function and cannot be switched off in our systems. They are usually only set in response to actions made by you which amount to a request for services, such as setting your privacy preferences, logging in or filling in forms. You can set your browser to block or alert you about these cookies, but some parts of the site will not then work. These cookies do not store any personally identifiable information.

These cookies enable the website to provide enhanced functionality and personalisation. They may be set by us or by third party providers whose services we have added to our pages. If you do not allow these cookies then some or all of these services may not function properly.

These cookies allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors move around the site.

These cookies may be set through our site by our advertising partners. They may be used by those companies to build a profile of your interests and show you relevant adverts on other sites. If you do not allow these cookies, you will experience less targeted advertising.

Outline

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.diamond.2018.11.005Get rights and content

Full text access

•We used sequential anodization in carmody buffer solution at pH 7 to generate carboxyl termination on graphene channel SGFET.•pH sensitivity of carboxyl-terminated graphene was 32.6 mV/pH in the low pH region and pH insensitive in the high pH region.•Weak pH detection at basic region caused by repulsion of OH- ions from negatively charged surface (–COO-) graphene channel.•Sequential anodization is reliable and show similar tendency pH sensitivities after anodization at different potential scans

We used sequential anodization in carmody buffer solution at pH 7 to generate carboxyl termination on graphene channel SGFET.

pH sensitivity of carboxyl-terminated graphene was 32.6 mV/pH in the low pH region and pH insensitive in the high pH region.

Weak pH detection at basic region caused by repulsion of OH- ions from negatively charged surface (–COO-) graphene channel.

Sequential anodization is reliable and show similar tendency pH sensitivities after anodization at different potential scans

In this work, we fabricated graphene solution-gate field-effect transistor (SGFET) to investigate the pH sensitivity of carboxyl functional groups. The functionalization of graphene with carboxyl was achieved throughanodizationby applying a sequential potential scan from 0.6 V to 1.3 V in 0.1 V steps.Raman spectroscopywas used to determine thedefect densityof the graphene caused by the anodization. The sequential anodization in Carmodybuffer solutionat pH 7 had low defective effect on graphene structure and shows that the original structure of graphene was conserved. Furthermore, we measured pH sensitivity of the carboxyl-functionalized graphene at pH 2 to pH 12. The pH sensitivity was 32.6 mV/pH at low pH region and pH sensitivity measurement was saturated at high pH (basic region). Thenegatively charged surfaceof carboxyl-functionalized graphene caused weak pH detection in the basic region. The pH sensing mechanism of carboxyl functionalized graphene in the low and high pH region is discussed in detail. The reliability of the carboxyl-functionalized graphene SGFET device was evaluated by measuring pH sensitivity repetitively after anodization at different potential scans of 0.9 V, 1.3 V, 1.5 V, 1.7 V and 1.9 V which demonstrated in all cases that, the pH sensitivity of carboxyl functionalization on graphene SGFET shows a similar trend. This functionalization method allows the modification of the graphene surface for further uses in biosensing.

Download:Download high-res image (170KB)Download:Download full-size image

Advanced semiconductor-based material devices have attracted significant attention as sensor materials for the detection ofbiomoleculesand chemicals owing to their simple device configurations, low cost, and real-time detection. Most importantly, advanced semiconductor-based devices usually involve electrical detection instead of conventional optical detection, which has advantages such as label-free, simple and rapid detection [1]. To realize electrical detection with biosensors, field effect transistors (FETs) have been used for the quantification of biological samples [2]. The most appealing advantage of FET biosensors for the detection of biomolecules is the capacity for direct conversion of a biological event to an electronic signal.Bio recognition elementssuch as cells, antibodies, enzymes, or proteins have been immobilized on the FET channels, and the biological response on the FET channel have been translated to a change in the conduction of FET. A good FET biosensor, must have accurate response, the bulk material must be biocompatible, and the biosensor should be cheap, portable and provide real-time detection [3]. In the past few decades, a significant amount of research has been devoted to the development of suitable bulk material for FET biosensors. For example, one-dimensionalsingle crystal siliconnanowires (SiNWs)-based FET have been reported as a high-switching characteristics biosensor device [4]. Another one-dimensional material that has been explored for use in biosensors iscarbon nanotubes(CNTs). The CNTs have been utilized as bulk for label-free biosensor FETs owing to its small diameter andhigh aspect ratios[5,6].

Two-dimensional (2D) materials such as graphene have also been used as a bulk to develop FET biosensors. In recent decades graphene has attracted significant research interest owing to its superior properties such as biocompatibility, chemical stability, large surface area, functionalization capability and extraordinarily highcarrier mobilityup to 105cm2V−1s−1at room temperature [7]. Graphene is also a low-cost material and can be easily prepared in a laboratory using thechemical vapor deposition(CVD) growth method [8]. The simple fabrication of graphene-based FET biosensors does not require the use of aninsulation layerunlike Si-ISFET. Therefore, the graphene channel surface is directly exposed to electrolytes, which is suitable for the development of highly sensitive label-free bio- and chemical sensors. In previous reports, graphene has been used as a bulk for FET devices for the detection of analytes such as ions for pH sensors [9,10]. The geometry of the graphene FET was described as a solution-gated configuration, which operated inaqueous media[11]. An Ag/AgCl electrode was used to apply thegate voltage, whereas thegate dielectricwas provided by theelectric double layer(EDL) [12] created at the solution/graphene interface. Graphene solution gate FETs (SGFETs) have been demonstrated for pH sensing and the detection of ions or bio-species by using various functional groups embedded on the graphene channel surface. Without functionalization, graphene appears as perfect a lattice withoutdangling bonds, which is insensitive to pH or the other biomolecules [13]. The graphene SGFETs can only be used as a sensor by functionalization of its channel with chemical moieties. Therefore, a considerable amount of research has been devoted to the functionalization of graphene, including typical covalent and noncovalent methods [14]. For example, the functionalization of graphene and its derivatives through covalent bonding of organic and inorganic molecules has been reported [15,16]. Another popular method to functionalize graphene is by intermolecular interactions, that is, through noncovalent methods [17]. Functionalization of graphene has also been performed by using plasma [18,19].

Most of the recent studies of graphene pH sensors have investigated the pH sensitivity of the hydroxyl (OH) group. In previous studies, the oxidation of graphene for pH sensitivity studies has been performed by covalent bonding, chemically [13] and electrochemically [20]. However these techniques damage and overoxidize the graphene surface. Consequently, these approaches are not suitable to oxidize the FET channel devices. In this paper, we investigated low defective oxidation through sequential anodization of a graphene SGFET device and measured the pH sensitivity of the anodized graphene. Although the amount of oxidation coverage on the anodized graphene could not be detected byXPSbecause of the small amount of oxidation, from the point of pKa, the graphene surface was dominated by carboxyl moieties after anodization treatment, which gave rise to pH sensitivity in the low pH region and insensitivity in the high pH region. The coverage of carboxyl group moieties on the graphene could be controlled by the potential voltage scan applied during the anodization process. To investigate the effect of anodization, we usedRaman spectroscopyandcyclic voltammetryto characterize thedefect densityon the anodized graphene SGFET and compare our result with published data [20]. Furthermore, we compared the pH dependent behavior of nonfunctionalized and carboxyl-functionalized graphene SGFET in the low and high pH region. Finally, we evaluated the reliability of the carboxyl-functionalized graphene SGFET device by measuring pH sensitivity repetitively after anodization at different potential scans. The results presented here may facilitate the understanding of pH mechanism of carboxyl-functionalized graphene at molecular level.

In this work, we used 10 × 10 mm monolayer graphene on quartz, which was prepared byCVDgrowth [21,22]. Pure gold with a thickness of 150 nm was evaporated on a graphene substrate through a metal mask placed at the center of the substrate to form symmetrical metal pads, source and drain. The length and width of the channel area were 6 mm and 10 mm, respectively. The graphene was set onto a glass slide using transparent adhesive before a pair of wires were bonded to the metal pads source and drain to enable external bias using a conductive silver paste (Chemtronic, Kennesaw, GA, USA). To passivate the metal pads from the electrolytes,epoxy resinAraldite 2000 (HuntsmanAdvanced Materials, Basel, Switzerland) was used to cover both the source and drain, leaving the channel area exposed to electrolyte.Fig. 1(a)–(c) illustrates the simple fabrication process of the graphene SGFET. The real image and a schematic diagram of a graphene SGFET device were shown inFig. 1(d) and (e), respectively. The anodic oxidation or anodization of the graphene SGFET device was performed using a two-electrode configuration method, with the reference electrode Ag/AgCl as the cathode and graphene SGFET as the anode. Anodization voltages of 0.6 V, 0.7 V, 0.8 V, 0.9 V, 1.0 V, 1.1 V, 1.2 V, and 1.3 V were sequentially applied at the anode in 100 mLbuffer solutionat pH 7 at room temperature. The current and voltage were supplied from a semiconductor device parameter analyzer model B1500A (Key sight, Tokyo, Japan), a source-measure unit integrated with a custom LABVIEW program (National Instruments, Austin, TX, USA). To complete a full scan of anodization, the potential was swept from −0.2 V to 0.6 V and was swept back to −0.2 V in decrements of 20 mV every 2.5 s. The same process was repeated by sweeping the bias from 0.6 V to 1.3 V with a 0.1 V step on the same device. The anodization setup is illustrated inFig. 1(f). The transfer curve characteristics were measured after each cycle of a complete anodization scan to observe the VDIRACshift which indicated the oxidation that occurred on graphene. The transfer characteristics of the graphene SGFET device were evaluated using the same source-measure unit semiconductor device parameter analyzer to supply a voltage at the drain-source (VDS) and gate-source (VGS) electrodes and a custom LABVIEW for data acquisition and processing. In this study, thegate voltagewas supplied through a commercial Ag/AgCl reference electrode. To avoid any inaccuracy in the data measurements, we used two different Ag/AgCl electrodes; one for anodization, and the other one for transfer characteristics measurements. The Ag/AgCl reference electrode that was used as a cathode in the anodization process might be unreliable for setting and controlling the potential of the solutions when measuring the current-voltage characteristics of the graphene SGFET device. The electrolyte solutions used was a wide range Carmody buffer solutions (pH 2–12), which was prepared in the laboratory by mixingboric acid(BH3O3),citric acidmonohydrate (C6H8O7), and trisodium phosphate dodecahydrate (Na3PO4·12H2O). A digital pH meter (model PH72; Yokogawa Electric Corp., Tokyo, Japan) was used to adjust and measure the pH solutions. The pH meter was calibrated by two-point calibration in phthalate pH standard solutions (pH values 6.86 ± 0.01 and 4.01 ± 0.01). To estimate the induced surface damage, the anodized graphene SGFET was evaluated using a three-electrode CV in 1.0 mM Fe(CN)63−/−4redox couplesolution in 1 M KCl with a scan rate of 100 mV/s. The result of the CV was compared with published data [20].Potassiumferricyanide (K3Fe[CN]6) and Potassium Ferrocyanide (K4Fe[CN]6) were purchased from Sigma Aldrich,Japan. Other chemicals were bought from Kanto Chemical Co, Inc. in Tokyo, Japan.Download:Download high-res image (232KB)Download:Download full-size imageFig. 1. (a)–(c)SGFETfabrication process (d) real image of a grapheneSGFETdevice (e) schematic diagram of a graphene SGFET and (f) sequentialanodizationsetup for the potential scans.

Because of the unique properties of graphene, which can accommodate both holes and electrons, the transfer characteristics of graphene SGFET depends on the carrier density and the type of carrier density (electrons or holes) in the channel area, which is controlled by the potential differences between the gate and the channel. Positive gate voltages develop an n-type channel where the electrons accumulate in the channel area. In contrast, when negative gate voltages are applied, the accumulation of holes in the channel develops a p-type channel. Therefore, the gate voltages applied (positive or negative gate voltage) also determine the position of the dirac point (VDIRAC) [23]. In this work, we applied negative gate anddrain voltages. Therefore, the graphene SGFET was operated as a p-type channel, in contrast to prior works [24,25], which employed an n-type channel by supplying positive gate and drain voltages. A p-type channel graphene SGFET has been demonstrated in previous studies, in which the negative gate voltages were applied and the output current values were negative [26].Fig. 2(a)shows the transfer characteristics of the graphene SGFET device in pH 7 buffer solution. The transfer characteristics of graphene SGFET demonstrated a V-shaped ambipolar FET behavior that had both hole andelectron transport, as reported in a previous study [27], where the VDIRACcan be defined at VGS= −0.24 V. The VDIRACof the curve was determined by the lowest point of the curve, which is also corresponded to the minimum conductivity. The mobility of the device was calculated from the transfer curve using the mobility equation μ = (1/Cg) (ɗσ/ɗVg) [28], in which Cgis thequantum capacitanceof the graphene (~20 nF cm−2) [29,30], σ is the conductance and Vgis the gate voltage. From the transfer characteristic curve inFig. 2(a), we estimated the average of mobility between holes and electrons is 1970 cm2V−1s−1.Download:Download high-res image (157KB)Download:Download full-size imageFig. 2.(a) The transfer characteristics of grapheneSGFETand (b) VDIRACshift afteranodizationwith a voltage of 0.6 V to 1.3 V with a step of 0.1 V.

Fig. 2(b) shows the drain-source current (IDS) curves as a function of gate voltage (VGS) after each anodic scan to observe the VDIRACshift of graphene SGFET in Carmody buffer solution pH 7. The gate voltage was swept from −0.5 V to 0 V with a drain-source voltage (VDS) fixed at −0.2 V. The VDIRACshifted to a more positive value after the potential anodization scan increased from 0.6 V to 1.3 V. The VDIRACshift to the positive side was caused by anodization which increased thedefect densityarea and createddangling bondson graphene which were terminated with oxygen groups. These dangling bonds were created when the anodization potentials imparted stress on the graphene lattice and caused strain, which consequently broke the lattice structures, followed by the reaction of water molecules with the unstable dangling bonds to form oxygen-terminated graphene. The result was in line with report in the literature, in which the sp2lattice of graphene can be broken by anodization to create edge plane defects terminated with oxygen functional groups such as hydroxyl (OH) and carboxyl (COOH) [31]. When the graphene SGFET was pre-oxidized with a potential of 0.6 V, the stress from the voltage breaks the sp2lattice and transform it into sp3bond with oxygen functional groups such as hydroxyl (OH) or carboxyl groups (COOH). Subsequent anodization at a higher potential, which was increased by 0.1 V after every full scan, increased the defect area on the graphene and the number of oxygen functional groups. Consequently, as the defect area increased, the number of negatively charged oxygen functional group bonds increased, and hole carriers were induced, which resulted in p-doped graphene, as indicated by the VDIRACshift towards a positive Vg. From the data inFig. 2(b), the VDIRACshifted by exactly 20 mV after each anodization, which can be clearly seen after 0.9 V was applied. A very mild oxidation occurred at 0.6 V, 0.7 V, and 0.8 V potential scan, however the voltages were not sufficient to induce structure strain in the sp2lattice. The sp2lattice started to fracture when a 0.9 V potential scan was applied. The reproducible nature of this change could be useful for controlling the oxidation of the graphene SGFET channel surface. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) was used to confirm the oxygen groups element on the graphene surface before and after the anodization, however there was no difference detected between the two conditions. Based on the insignificant XPS data measurement, considering that with small amount of oxidation, the graphene surface not only covered by chemisorbed oxygen species, but also accompanied by physisorbed oxygen species. Accurate XPS data measurement might be feasible in the future work, provided that the anodization process was done in in-situ ambient chamber. The COOH with pKa 2–5 [32] is acidic and relatively easy to protonate/deprotonate in pH solutions compare to OH which the pKa is commonly near 10 [33]. Higher pKa of OH group implies that it will not be protonated/deprotonated in pH solutions, but possibly in other solvents. Therefore, it is sensible to suggest that the dominant functional groups presence after sequential anodization treatment is carboxyl termination.

The impact of thedefect densityon the graphene caused by the anodization process was investigated viaRaman spectroscopy, before anodization and after anodization at 1.3 V, as shown inFig. 3(a). TheRaman spectrawere measured at three locations to investigate the average defects. The small D peak at ~1340 cm−1corresponds to the lattice disorder of graphene, whereas the G peak at ~1580 cm−1corresponds to the sp2bond carbon atom vibration. The degree of defects on the graphene can be determined by the ratio of the intensities of D and G band. In this case, the lower intensity of the D band peak compared with the G band intensity before anodization demonstrated that the graphene had pristine characteristics. After anodization at 1.3 V, a small D peak intensity increased at each location which also gave rise to the ID/IGratio.Table 1provides additional details of the ID/IGratio values before and after anodization at 1.3 V as a complement to the Raman spectroscopy data inFig. 3(a). The ID/IGratio before anodization at location 1, 2 and 3 was 0.188, 0.154 and 0.156, respectively. After anodization at 1.3 V, the ID/IGratio increased to 0.248 at location 1, 0.183 at location 2, and 0.168 at location 3. The percentage increase in defect density, which was calculated from the difference of ID/IGratios (before and after anodization at 1.3 V), was 24%, 16% and 7% at location 1, 2 and 3, respectively. On average, the percentage of defect density on the graphene surface caused by sequential anodization was 16%. Furthermore, the small increment of the ID/IGratio values indicated that thegraphene oxidedid not form during the sequential anodization process. We observed that the G peak did not increase before and after anodization, which was expected because the graphene on quartz substrate was defect- free compared with the other studies, in which the anodization ofepitaxial grapheneonsilicon carbide(SiC) substrate gives a bigger ID/IGratio value [20] because the epitaxial graphene on SiC suffered fromcompressive stresswhere the graphene lattice mismatched with the carbon nanomesh [34]. The mismatch caused lattice strain and eventually breaking off the lattice, which produced produce more defects on the graphene surface and affected the electronic properties of the graphene.Download:Download high-res image (145KB)Download:Download full-size imageFig. 3.(a)Raman spectrabefore and after anodization at 1.3 V on a graphene monolayer using 633 nmexcitation laser. The D and G peak are at ~1340 cm−1, ~1580 cm−1, respectively (b) CV for anodized graphene SGFET in 1.0 mM Fe(CN)63−/4−in 1 M KCl with scan rate of 100 mV/ s.Table 1. ID/IGratio before and after sequential anodization at 1.3 V and the percentage (%) of defect increase.LocationID/IGratio before anodizationID/IGratio after 1.3 V anodizationPercentage (%) of defect increasePoint 10.1880.24824Point 20.1540.18316Point 30.1560.1687

To estimate the level of induced surface damage on the graphene surface, we carried out a CV test on the anodized graphene SGFET in Fe(CN)63−/4−redox couplesolution with a scan rate of 100 mV/s and compared our results with published data [20]. It was proposed that the electron transfer rate constant on the pyrolytic graphitebasal planewould increase linearly with the density defects on graphene [35]. The increase in the electrochemical reactivity caused by the defects on the graphene led to an increase of the electron transfer kinetics. The electron transfer kinetics of the Fe(CN)63−/4−couple and the defect density were determined by the peak separation of CV graph.Fig. 3(b) shows CV graph of a graphene SGFET after sequential anodization at 1.3 V, and the result exhibited no peak separation at all. In comparison to the published data, with the same scale of current density, the graphene SGFET was slightly damaged compared with pristine EG, and there was less damaged surface than anodized EG (200 s) data in published work [20]. This clearly demonstrated that the sequential anodization induced low defect density and provided mild oxidation on the graphene surface in comparison to the other work. It has been suggested that the monolayer graphene has higher reactivity compared with bilayer graphene [36], therefore, sequential anodization could provide a new way of carrying out low defective modification of monolayer graphene surface with oxygen functional group.

The pH sensitivity of a graphene SGFET was investigated before and after anodization in Carmody buffer solution in a wide pH range from 2 to 12 to observe the effect of anodization on the pH sensitivity. The gate voltage (VGS) was swept from −0.5 V to 0 V and the drain voltage (VDS) was fixed at −0.2 V.Fig. 4a(i) and b(i) show the transfer characteristics of graphene SGFET at different pH. The pH sensitivity of the device was determined by the shift of VDIRACin varies pH solutions. InFig. 4a(i), the curves made a small shift towards a positive gate voltage from pH 2–12. Our results were consistent with previous studies, which showed a common trend of VDIRACshift towards p-doping as the pH increased [37]. In the pH 2, the dominant hydronium (H3O+) ions in the electrolytes bound on graphene channel, which induces the formation of electron carriers and makes graphene n-doped. As the pH increased, the amount of negatively charged hydroxyl (OH−) ions in the electrolyte increased, which induces the formation of hole carriers and makes graphene channel p-doped. Therefore, as the pH varied from pH 2–12, the VDIRACwas shifted from n-doping to p-doping. Theoretically, graphene without functionalization is not sensitive to pH owing to the lack of free bonds, thus, no VDIRACshift was expected. However in practice, the graphene always shows weak pH sensitivity (from 6 mV/pH to 20 mV/pH), as reported in the literature [26,38] due to some defects on the surface and along the edges which could be created duringdevice fabricationor transfer process [13]. In our studies, as demonstrated inFig. 4a(ii), the curves before anodization were mostly linear between pH 3 and pH 9 with a pH sensitivity of 20 mV/pH, whereas at a higher pH, there was a glitch observed at pH 10.Download:Download high-res image (331KB)Download:Download full-size imageFig. 4. The transfer characteristics of graphene SGFET measured in different pHbuffer solutions, a(i) before anodization and b(i) after anodization. pH sensitivities measured at low and high pH region a(ii) before anodization and b(ii) after anodization.

Next, we demonstrated the pH sensitivity and sensing mechanism of the anodized graphene SGFET.Fig. 4b(i) shows the VDIRACshift in the low pH region (pH 2–7), whereas almost no VDIRACshift was observed in the high pH region (pH 8–12). This behavior was attributed to the presence of carboxyl functional groups (COOH) on the graphene after the anodization process. TheCOOH groups have typical pKa values in the range of 2–5 and can be easily ionized in a basic environment (pH > 7). In lower pH solutions, the presence of carboxyl groups (COOH) on the graphene surface induced electron accumulation in the channel area. In addition to the high availability of hydronium ions (H3O+) in the low pH solutions bounded on the graphene surface, more electrons were induced in the channel area, resulting in an n-doping channel. As the pH increase, the H3O+ions are decrease, electron carriers in the channel area are replaced by holes carriers, therefore the VDIRACis gradually shifted towards positive gate voltage. At pH > 8, no VDIRACshift was observed becauseCOOH was deprotonated tocarboxylateions (COO−). The carboxylate ions on graphene caused repulsion of the hydroxyl ions (OH−) in theHelmholtzinner plane. Therefore, the number of hole carriers under the channel remained constant (p-doped) and no VDIRACshift was expected. The pH sensitivity curve of the carboxyl-terminated graphene was linear between pH 2 and pH 7 with pH sensitivity of 32.6 mV/pH, whereas at a higher pH (from pH 8 to pH 12), the system could not distinguish between pH. Therefore, in the high pH region, the measurement of pH sensitivity is saturated as depicted inFig. 4b(ii). Remarkably, the pH sensitivity of the carboxyl-terminated graphene at low pH exhibited higher pH sensitivity compared to nonfunctionalized graphene in the same region. The increased pH sensitivity at low pH was simply because of the increase of the defective area of graphene after anodization as represented by the ID/IGratio data inTable 1, which resulted in more carboxyl functional groups on the surface. Therefore, the functionalized graphene should be more responsive to pH changes compared with nonfunctionalized graphene, which has uncontrollable and random surface defective shows weak pH sensitivity [39]. Conversely, the pH sensitivity of carboxyl-terminated graphene in the high pH region (pH > 8) was weak because of repulsion of hydroxyl ions from negatively charged graphene surface. Clearly, no pH detection was expected at the high pH region. The VDIRACshift of the graphene SGFET in varying pH after anodization could be reproduced each time at the first immersion in electrolytes from pH 2–12, albeit the second cycle of the pH, the VDIRACshift is a little bit change. A total of 10 graphene SGFET devices were characterized in this work. All the devices exhibited the same pH sensitivity tendencies after anodization treatment; the devices were pH sensitive in the low pH region and pH insensitive in the high pH region.

To evaluate the reliability of the anodization on graphene, a SGFET device was sequentially applied with a series of potential scans from 0.6 V to 1.9 V in 0.1 V steps in Carmody buffer solution at pH 7. The pH sensitivities of the device were measured before and after anodization at selective potential voltages of 0.9 V, 1.3 V, 1.5 V, 1.7 V and 1.9 V as depicted inFig. 5(a)–(f). The pH sensitivity of the device before anodization was 14.8 mV/pH, and the pH sensitivities after anodization at 0.9 V, 1.3 V, 1.5 V, 1.7 V and 1.9 V were 21.7, 26, 31.4, 29.7 and 30 mV/pH, respectively in the low pH region. With mild anodization at 0.9 V, the device exhibited a pH sensitivity of 21.7 mV/pH. After anodization at 1.3 V and 1.5 V, the pH sensitivities increase to 26 mV/pH and 31.4 mV/pH, respectively. However, the anodization was saturated at 1.7 V and the device showed constant pH sensitivity of approximately 30 mV/pH after anodization at 1.7 V and 1.9 V. These results indicated that after the anodization at 1.7 V, the graphene retained its carbon bonds, and the formation of carboxyl functional groups was saturated and only occurred at the broken chemical bonds, hence the pH sensitivity of the device remained constant. In contrast to a recent study of anodization on hydrogenated diamond by the same method, the CH bonds on diamond were easily replaced with carboxyl functional groups as the anodization potential increased [40]. There was a moderate fluctuation of the VDIRACpoints after the repetitive measurement of the pH sensitivities. However, in all cases, the pH sensitivity tendency after the functionalization of graphene SGFET with carboxyl groups demonstrated pH sensitivity in the low pH region and pH insensitive in the high pH region as discussed previously. The fact that the pH sensitivity tendency of graphene SGFET are same after repetitive anodization and pH sensitivity measurements, is an evidence to support the reliability of this particular functionalization method. The results could be further elaborated in terms of graphene stability. The time of anodization at each potential is given inTable 2. The graphene substrate used in this work (graphene on quartz) was very stable from the point of anodic oxidation to the extent of 2537.5 s of anodization time, unlike the other graphene onsilicon carbide[20] which changed its characteristics after 500 s of anodization.Download:Download high-res image (269KB)Download:Download full-size imageFig. 5. pH sensitivities of graphene SGFET (a) before anodicoxidationand after anodization at (b) 0.9 V (c) 1.3 V (d) 1.5 V (e) 1.7 V and (f) 1.9 V.Table 2. Anodization time recorded for each potential scan from 0.6 to 1.9 V.Anodization potential [V]Anodization time [s]Anodization potential [V]Anodization time [s]0.61001.3187.50.7112.51.42000.81251.5212.50.9137.51.62251.01501.7237.51.1162.51.82501.21751.9262.5

We systematically studied the effect of the pH sensitivity of graphene containing carboxyl- terminated functional groups at low and high pH region. The carboxyl functional groups on graphene was generated by sequential anodization in buffer solution at pH 7. The pH sensitivity in the low pH region after anodization was observed to increase compared with nonfunctionalized graphene SGFET owing to the increase of defective area caused by anodization. The pH sensitivity in the high pH region was very weak (almost insensitive) owing to the repulsion of negatively charged graphene channel surface (COO−) and the dominanthydroxyl ions(OH−) in basic solutions. Furthermore, we confirmed that the functionalization on graphene by using this method is low defective and the carbon bonds of graphene could be retained. The functionalization ofCOOH on the graphene surface can be controlled without degrading thecarrier mobility. In addition, this particular anodization method is also reliable to produce carboxyl-terminated graphene. This simple approach to prepare graphene with carboxyl terminals could be useful for the preparation of a biosensor device for immobilizing amino-terminatedbiomoleculessuch as proteins, carbohydrates and DNA.

This study was funded by theJapan Science and Technology Agency(Adaptable and Seamless Technology Transfer Program through Target-driven R&D) and a Grant-in-Aid for fundamental research (26220903,JSPS). A part of this study was supported by project of Creation of Life Innovation Materials for Interdisciplinary and International Researcher Development (MEXT).

None.

Laser-induced tuning of graphene field-effect transistors for pH sensing2023, Physical Chemistry Chemical PhysicsStatus and Prospects of Heterojunction-Based HEMT for Next-Generation Biosensors2023, MicromachinesTen years progress of electrical detection of heavy metal ions (Hmis) using various field-effect transistor (fet) nanosensors: A review2021, BiosensorsGraphene-based field-effect transistors integrated with microfluidic chip for real-time pH monitoring of seawater2020, Journal of Materials Science: Materials in ElectronicsPoly(vinyl alcohol)/carboxyl graphene mixed matrix membranes: High-power ultrasonic treatment for enhanced pervaporation performance2020, Journal of Applied Polymer SciencePoly(vinyl alcohol)/Carboxyl Graphene Membranes for Ethanol Dehydration by Pervaporation2020, Chemical Engineering and TechnologyView all citing articles on Scopus

Laser-induced tuning of graphene field-effect transistors for pH sensing2023, Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics

Status and Prospects of Heterojunction-Based HEMT for Next-Generation Biosensors2023, Micromachines

Ten years progress of electrical detection of heavy metal ions (Hmis) using various field-effect transistor (fet) nanosensors: A review2021, Biosensors

Graphene-based field-effect transistors integrated with microfluidic chip for real-time pH monitoring of seawater2020, Journal of Materials Science: Materials in Electronics

Poly(vinyl alcohol)/carboxyl graphene mixed matrix membranes: High-power ultrasonic treatment for enhanced pervaporation performance2020, Journal of Applied Polymer Science

Poly(vinyl alcohol)/Carboxyl Graphene Membranes for Ethanol Dehydration by Pervaporation2020, Chemical Engineering and Technology

12th International New Diamond and Nano Carbons Conference (NDNC 2018)View special issue

12th International New Diamond and Nano Carbons Conference (NDNC 2018)

View details