Highly sensitive detection of mercury(II) ions with few- layer molybdenum disulfide Shan Jiang1, Rui Cheng2, Rita Ng1, Yu Huang2,3, and Xiangfeng Duan1,3 () 1 Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of California, Los Angeles, California 90095, USA 2 Department of Materials Science and Engineering, University of California, Los Angeles, California 90095, USA 3 California Nanosystems Institute, University of California, Los Angeles, California 90095, USA Received: 6 October 2014 Revised: 24 November 2014 Accepted: 27 November 2014 © Tsinghua University Press and Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2014 KEYWORDS molybdenum disulfide, 2D layered materials,  mercury, doping effect, sensors 1 Introduction  ABSTRACT Two-dimensional (2D) layered transition metal dichalcogenide (TMD) materials (e.g., MoS2) have attracted considerable interest due to their atomically thin geometry and semiconducting electronic properties. With ultrahigh surface to volume ratio, the electronic properties of these atomically thin semiconductors can be readily modulated by their environment. Here we report an investigation of the effects of mercury(II) (Hg2+) ions on the electrical transport properties of few-layer molybdenum disulfide (MoS2). The interaction between Hg2+ ions and few-layer MoS2 was studied by field-effect transistor measurements and photoluminescence. Due to a high binding affinity between Hg2+ ions and the sulfur sites on the surface of MoS2 layers, Hg2+ ions can strongly bind to MoS2. We show that the binding of Hg2+ can produce a p-type doping effect to reduce the electron concentration in n-type few-layer MoS2. It can thus effectively modulate the electron transport and photoluminescence properties in few-layer MoS2. By monitoring the conductance change of few-layer MoS2 in varying concentration Hg2+ solutions, we further show that few-layer MoS2 transistors can function as highly sensitive sensors for rapid electrical detection of Hg2+ ion with a detection limit of 30 pM. Transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) are emerging as an exciting material system for a new generation of atomically thin electronics due to their unique electronic and chemical properties [1–16]. With the ultra-thin geometry, surface chemical doping can significantly modulate the electronic properties of single- or few-layer TMDs [17–22]. Because of the high binding affinity between mercury and sulfur, Hg2+ ion can strongly bind to sulfur on the surface of MoS2 and thus affect the electrical transport properties of the few-layer MoS2 devices. Here we report an investigation into the effects of mercury(II) ions on electronic transport properties of few-layer MoS2. The interaction between Hg2+ ions and few-layer MoS2 Address correspondence to Xiangfeng Duan, email: xduan@chem.ucla.edu 258 was studied by field-effect transistor (FET) measurements and photoluminescence spectroscopy. We show that the electrical transport properties of MoS2 FET devices can be significantly modulated by Hg2+ ions. These atomically thin MoS2 FET devices can thus be configured as effective sensors for real-time electrical detection of Hg2+ ions.  Mercury contamination is an important environmental problem originating from anthropogenic sources such as coal and fuel combustion [23]. According   to the World Health Organization (WHO) standards, mercury concentration should be less than 0.001 mg/L (5 nM) in drinking water [24]. It is therefore essential to develop highly sensitive mercury detection techniques to determine very low concentrations of mercury for reliable risk assessment [25-31]. Here, we show that the MoS2 FET device can selectively respond to Hg2+ ions in real-time with a detection limit of 30 pM. The MoS2 FET device promises significant potential for highly sensitive, low-cost and rapid detection of mercury ions in aquatic environment. 2 Experimental To fabricate the MoS2 EFT, few-layer MoS2 flakes were mechanically exfoliated onto a 300 nm Si/SiO2 substrate. Electron-beam lithography and electron-beam evaporation were used to define the contact electrodes. A thin Ni/Au film (5 nm/50 nm) was used as the electrode to form Ohmic contacts with minimized contact resistance and potential barrier [32]. The MoS2 device was then coupled with a polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) micro- fluidic channel for Hg2+ solution delivery.  3 Results and discussion We first characterized the electrical transport properties of MoS2 to ensure Ohmic contacts were achieved. To this end, the MoS2 FETs were fabricated on a Si/SiO2 substrate, with a Ni/Au thin film as the source-drain contacts, and the silicon substrate as the back gate electrode (Fig. 1(a)). The Ids–Vds characteristics at varying back gate voltages (Fig. 2(a)) and the Ids–Vbg characteristics (Fig. 2(b)) for MoS2 were measured. Importantly, a linear Ids–Vds relationship was clearly observed, indicating Ohmic contacts were achieved. Nano Res. 2015, 8(1): 257–262 Figure 1 Schematic illustration of a MoS2 FET device as mercury (II) sensor. (a) Schematic illustration a MoS2 device with the green dots representing Hg2+ ion that could bind to surface sulfur atoms. (b) Schematic of microfluidic Hg2+ solution delivery system integrated on the MoS2 device. The sizes of source and drain electrodes are 2 μm  5 μm. (All the electrodes described here are the ends near the MoS2 in the figure. The other ends have 100 μm  100 μm pads for wire bonding). The size of gate electrode is 50 μm  50 μm. The PDMS channel is 1-mm in width, 0.5-mm in height, 1-cm in length. The source-drain electrodes are passivated with a PMMA layer. Furthermore, the Ids–Vbg plot shows that the current increases with increasing positive gate voltages for MoS2, consistent with the expected n-type semiconductor behavior. The logarithmic plot of the Ids–Vbg curve shows that the device exhibits an on-off ratio up to106. Additionally, the carrier mobility of the MoS2 device can also be derived to be 87 cm2/(V·s) (see the Electronic Supplementary Material for details), comparable to that of the best MoS2 devices, demonstrating the high quality of our device. We next investigated the interaction between MoS2 and Hg2+ ion by FET measurements. To this end, the experiments were performed using a micro-fluidic system with a PDMS channel integrated on top of the MoS2 device (Fig. 1(b)), and Hg2+ ion solutions with increasing concentrations were introduced into the PDMS channel through a syringe pump during the electrical measurement. The Hg2+ ion solutions were made by dissolving Hg(ClO4)2 in deionized water. To show the effect of Hg2+ ions on the electrical properties of the MoS2 device, the conductance of the device was plotted against solution gate voltage under different Hg2+ ion concentrations (Fig. 2(c)). Importantly, the MoS2 devices show a consistent positive shift of the threshold voltage with increasing Hg2+ ion concentration from 0 to 1 M (Figure S1). This positive shift of the threshold voltage suggests a p-doping effect of the Hg2+ ions to the MoS2 channel. It is well known Hg2+ ions have a high binding affinity toward sulfur, with a stability constant of 2.5 × 1052 for Hg2+ ion  | www.editorialmanager.com/nare/default.asp Nano Res. 2015, 8(1): 257–262 259 Figure 2 Electrical transport properties of a MoS2 FET. (a) Ids–Vds characteristics at varying back gate voltage under ambient conditions. (b) Linear (red) and logarithmic plot (black) of Ids–Vbg characteristics under ambient conditions at Vds = 0.1 V. (c) Solution gate dependent measurement in varying concentrations of Hg2+ ion in aqueous solution, with 10 mM KClO4 as electrolyte. coordination with an S2– ligand. In this case, the coordination between Hg2+ ions and sulfur on the surface of MoS2 can cause a partial electron transfer from MoS2 to Hg2+, resulting in a p-type doping effect. It is also noted that the slope of the Ids–Vg plot in Fig. 2(c) decreases slightly with increasing Hg2+ ion concentration (Fig. S1), suggesting a decreasing transconductance and decreasing mobility, which may be attributed to charge impurity (bound Hg2+ ion) induced scattering effect.  To further understand the doping effect of Hg2+ ions on MoS2, photoluminescence (PL) spectroscopy was also used to characterize the MoS2 device in aqueous solutions of Hg2+ ions. In general, the PL emission peak of MoS2 exhibits excitonic A (1.85 eV) and B (2.05 eV) peaks, which are associated with the direct gap transition at the K (K’ ) point, and the energy difference between the A and B peaks is caused by the valence-band splitting due to the strong spin−orbital interaction [33–35]. With the presence of Hg2+ ion in the aqueous solution, the peak energy of excitonic A peak is blue-shifted as compared to that in deionized water (Fig. 3(a)). The spectral shape of the excitonic A peak is also clearly sharper in Hg2+ ion solution. The excitonic A peak can be further decomposed into the exciton (X; ~1.88 eV; red line) peak and the negative trion (X–; ~1.84 eV; blue line) using Lorentzian fitting functions (Figs. 3(b) and 3(c)) [35]. Compared that in deionized water (Fig. 3(b)), the exciton peak X becomes more dominant in Hg2+ ion solution (Fig. 3(c)). In as- prepared MoS2, trion (X–) recombination is dominant because of its intrinsic n-type behavior [36]. With increasing p-type doping by Hg2+ ions, the excess number of electrons is decreased, and the exciton peak X becomes more dominant because the excitons can recombine without forming trions [37]. It is also evident that a broad shoulder peak (L; ~1.75 eV; yellow line) becomes much stronger in Hg2+ ion solutions.   Figure 3 Photoluminescence spectroscopy of MoS2 in Hg2+ ion solution. (a) PL spectroscopy of few-layer MoS2 in water and in Hg2+ ion solution. (b) Analysis of the PL spectroscopy for few-layered MoS2. The A peak was decomposed into two peaks with Lorentzian functions, corresponding to the trion (X−) (blue) and the exciton (X) (red) peaks. To additional peaks was assigned as L peak (yellow) and B peak (green). (c) Analysis of the PL spectroscopy for few-layered MoS2 in Hg2+ ion solution. The PL peaks are decomposed in a similar way to that in (b). www.theNanoResearch.com∣www.Springer.com/journal/12274 | Nano Research 260 L is assigned as a bound exciton peak [38]; this is attributed to neutral excitons bound to defects. The increase in peak height of L indicates there are more binding sites or defects available for bound excitons [39], which can be attributed to Hg–S binding. This is also consistent with reducing carrier mobility with increasing number of bound Hg2+ ions as the scattering center.  The above studies clearly demonstrate the binding of Hg2+ on MoS2 surface can effectively modulate the electron concentration in MoS2 and therefore its conductance. It is therefore possible to use the ultra-thin MoS2 FET to construct an electronic sensor for the detection of Hg2+ in aqueous solution. To this end, we monitored the conductance of MoS2 FET in response to Hg2+ solutions of increasing concentrations. Figure 4(a) shows a real-time electrical readout of different concentrations of Hg2+ ions from 0 to 1 M. The conductance of MoS2 FET shows a clear step-wise decrease as Hg2+ ion concentration is increased. We also plotted the magnitude of the conductance change against the Hg2+ ion concentration to obtain the calibration curve for Hg2+ ion detection (Fig. 4(b)), which can be fitted with a logarithmic plot. Based on this Nano Res. 2015, 8(1): 257–262 plot, a lowest absolute detection limit of 30 pM can be achieved with a signal to noise ratio of 3. We have  conducted similar measurement on 10 devices. A similar detection limit of 30–120 pM was achieved. To explore the application of MoS2 devices as Hg2+ ion sensors, we further investigated the selectivity and specificity of the MoS2 devices. Using a similar protocol, we tested a series of potentially interfering chemicals including sodium(I), potassium(I), magnesium(II), calcium(II), manganese(II), iron(II), iron(III), cobalt(II), nickel(II), tin(II), lead(II), zinc(II), cadmium(II), silver(I) and copper(II). At the same concentration  of 1 nM, the device responds to mercury with the strongest signal (Fig. 4(c)), demonstrating the potential application of the MoS2 devices for mercury detection in aqueous solution.  4 Conclusions The interaction between MoS2 and Hg2+ ion can    be studied using FET measurement and photoluminescence. A change in the conductance of MoS2 FET as a function of Hg2+ ion concentration was observed, which can be attributed to the p-doping Figure 4 Real-time electrical readout of Hg2+ ion signal by MoS2 sensor. (a) Real-time electrical measurement at different concentrations of Hg2+ ions. (b) Calibration curve: conductance change versus Hg2+ ion concentration. The red line is the fitted curve on a natural log scale. (c) Selectivity of the MoS2 mercury (II) sensor. Concentrations of mercury (II) and all the potential interfering ions are 1 nM. | www.editorialmanager.com/nare/default.asp Nano Res. 2015, 8(1): 257–262 effect and increased number of scattering centers caused by Hg2+ ion binding to MoS2. The photoluminescence studies show a similar consistent trend. The doping mechanism is based on the strong binding affinity between Hg2+ ions and sulfur on the surface of MoS2. Our study shows that the MoS2 FET holds significant potential for application in the highly sensitive, low- cost, and fast detection of mercury ions in an aquatic environment.  Acknowledgements We acknowledge the Nanoelectronics Research Facility (NRF) and Center for High Frequency Electronics (CHFE) at UCLA for technical support. X.D. acknowledges support by the U.S. National Science Foundation (NSF) CAREER award (No. 0956171). Y.H. acknowledges the U.S. National Institutes of Health (NIH) Director’s New Innovator Award Program (No. 1DP2OD007279). Electronic Supplementary Material: Supplementary material (Fig. 2(c) with linear fits and calculation of mobility) is available in the online version of this article at http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s12274-014-0658-x. 
Electronic Supplementary Material Highly sensitive detection of mercury(II) ions with fewlayer molybdenum disulfide Shan Jiang1, Rui Cheng2, Rita Ng1, Yu Huang2,3, and Xiangfeng Duan1,3 () 1 Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of California, Los Angeles, California 90095, USA 2 Department of Materials Science and Engineering, University of California, Los Angeles, California 90095, USA 3 California Nanosystems Institute, University of California, Los Angeles, California 90095, USA Supporting information to DOI 10.1007/s12274-014-0658-x 1 Figure 2(c) with linear fits Figure S1 Solution gate dependent measurement in varying concentrations of Hg2+ ion in aqueous solution, with liner fits to show the threshold voltage. 2 Calculation of the mobility of the MoS2 FET in Fig. 2(b) The mobility of a MoS2 FET can be calculated by the equation: g m 1     L W C V bg ds Here L = 2.0 m is the channel length and W = 1.7 m is the channel width. gm = 0.85 S is the peak transconductance and Cbg = 11.5 nF/cm2 is the capacitance of the back-gated MoS2 device. Vds = 0.1 V is the source-drain bias applied to the MoS2 device. A mobility of 87 cm2/(V·s) can be extracted from the Ids-Vbg curve. 