Bin Wang

Department of Chemical Engineering and Russell Berrie Nanotechnology Institute, Technion-Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, 3200003 Israel

Tan-Phat Huynh

Weiwei Wu

Naseem Hayek

Thu Trang Do

School of Chemistry, Physics and Mechanical Engineering, Queensland University of Technology (QUT), 4001 Brisbane, Australia

John C. Cancilla

Department of Chemical Engineering, Complutense University of Madrid, Madrid, 28040 Spain

Jose S. Torrecilla

Masrur Morshed Nahid

Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Monash University, Clayton, Victoria, 3800 Australia

John M. Colwell

Oz M. Gazit

Sreenivasa Reddy Puniredd

Institute of Materials Research and Engineering (IMRE), Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR), 2 Fusionopolis Way, Innovis, Singapore, 138634 Singapore

Christopher R. McNeill

Corresponding Author

Prashant Sonar

Hossam Haick

Give access

Share full-text access

Use the link below to share a full-text version of this article with your friends and colleagues.Learn more.

Share a link

An ambipolar poly(diketopyrrolopyrrole-terthiophene)-based field-effect transistor (FET)sensitively detects xylene isomers at low ppm levels with multiple sensing features. Combined with pattern-recognition algorithms, a sole ambipolar FET sensor, rather than arrays of sensors, can discriminate highly similar xylene structural isomers from one another.

Xylenes, which include three isomers, i.e.,o-xylene,m-xylene, andp-xylene, are important petrochemicals.1Individual and mixed xylene isomers are widely used as chemical intermediates to make polyesters and as solvents in the printing, rubber, and leather industries, as well as in household products (aerosol paints and lacquers).1Volatilization of xylenes in air can impair the human respiratory system, the central nervous system, liver, kidneys, eyes, and skin.2The U.S. National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) has recommended long- and short-term exposure limits for xylenes of 100 and 150 ppm, respectively.[2] Though xylene isomers have similar structural and physical properties, they have different industrial applications.1Moreover, the three xylene isomers are metabolized by different pathways in the body.3Hence, the detection and discrimination of xylene isomers is essential in environmental monitoring and healthcare.2,3

In principle, high-resolution gas chromatography (HRGC) can be used to detect and discriminate xylene isomers.4However, it requires expensive equipment and well-trained operators, making HRGC unsuitable for environmental monitoring. A number of methods, including mass sensor arrays,5chemiresistor sensor arrays,6sensors based on metal oxide semiconductors,7and cataluminescence sensor arrays,8have been developed for cost-effective detection of xylene isomers. Although selective detection has been achieved with arrays of sensors, their detection limits are always very high (e.g., 104, 103, and 400 ppm as reported in refs. [7],5, and6respectively). 5 ppmp-xylene has been detected using cobalt-doped zinc oxide nanowire-based sensors.[7] However, such metal-oxide-semiconductor-based sensors work only at a relatively high temperature (>400 °C) and no selectivity regarding the other isomers of xylenes has been reported for these sensors. Therefore, detection of xylene isomers with high selectivity and sensitivity below the health-risk threshold level of 100 ppm remains a significant challenge. A reliable selective sensor for the detection of mixed xylene isomers, widely used as solvents in the chemical industry, is lacking as well.

We report here a sensor based on an ambipolar diketopyrrolopyrrole (DPP) copolymer field-effect transistor (FET) to selectively and sensitively detect xylene isomers at 40 ppm, which is below the NIOSH long-term exposure limit for xylene isomers. The rationale behind this approach is that an ambipolar FET that can operate alternatively in n-channel and p-channel modes has been adopted for the generation of double-sensing parameters in hole and electron changes, rather than using a unipolar FET.9Therefore, it is reasonable that an ambipolar FET sensor would provide more degrees of freedom to enhance the selective detection of structurally highly similar chemicals, e.g., between isomers. Indeed, by combining multiple sensing parameters derived from hole and electron effects obtained from the one ambipolar FET with a pattern-recognition algorithm, chemical fingerprints for each of the xylene isomers can be taken to clearly discriminate between structurally similar isomers. The ambipolar FET sensor can also selectively detect solvents of binary and ternaryo-,m-, andp-xylene mixtures at different ratios via vapor sensing.

An alternating copolymer, poly(diketopyrrolopyrrole-terthiophene) referred to asPDPPHD-T3(Figure1a), was synthesized by Stille coupling, using hexyldecyl-substituted DPP flanked with thiophene as previously reported10(see also “Experimental Section” below and Supporting Information, Section S1). Polymer characterization data can be found in Section S1 and Figure S1–S5 of the Supporting Information. A long alkyl chain, hexyldecyl, was attached to the DPP block to help the processing of a solution of the polymer. The conjugated main chains ofPDPPHD-T3probably have a high affinity for aromatic xylene isomers. Figure1b shows a scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image of the spin-coatedPDPPHD-T3film between source and drain electrodes. It is apparent that thePDPPHD-T3chains have self-assembled into a nanofibrillar structure with an average diameter of 34 nm. This structure has a large surface-to-volume ratio, creating a large area suitable for adsorption of analytes. The film structure has also been examined by grazing-incidence wide-angle X-ray scattering (GIWAXS) (see Supporting Information, Section S2). The peak atq≈ 1.7 Å−1(most prominent in the out-of-plane trace) corresponds to the π–π stacking of the polymer backbones with a 0.37 nmd-spacing (Figure1c). The peak located atq≈ 0.34 Å−1(most prominent in the in-plane trace) corresponds to the alkyl stacking of polymer chains with a 1.85 nmd-spacing. The corresponding 2D scattering image is shown in Figure S6 in the Supporting Information. Considering the molecular size of the xylene isomers (Table1), we expect that the xylene isomers diffuse into thePDPPHD-T3crystallites, especially between their side chains and induce changes in electrical characteristics. The representative example in Figure1d shows the source–drain current (Ids) versus gate voltage (Vg) curves of thePDPPHD-T3polymer FET under N2. The polymer FET shows a typical V-sharp ambipolar transfer character; notably, the conductive channel can transport both electron and hole charge carriers. The FET parameters for both electron and hole transport, such as electron mobility (μe), hole mobility (μh), electron threshold voltage (Vth-e), hole threshold voltage (Vth-h), electron subthreshold swing (SSe), and hole subthreshold swing (SSh), can be calculated from theIds–Vgplots and also used as sensing parameters for xylene exposure (details of the FET parameter calculations can be found in Section S3 of the Supporting Information). The calculated hole mobility, hole threshold voltage, electron mobility, and threshold voltages ofPDPPHD-T3FET under N2are 0.125 cm2V−1s−1, −13.9 V, 0.027 cm2V−1s−1, and 4.48 V, respectively.

Based on the measuredIds–Vgcurves, multiple sensing parameters: changes in hole voltage threshold, ΔVth-h; normalized changes in the hole mobility, Δμh/μhb; hole subthreshold swing, ΔSSh; changes in the electron voltage threshold, ΔVth-e; normalized changes in the electron mobility, Δμe/μeb; and electron subthreshold swing, ΔSSewere calculated and plotted as a function of time (Figure2a–f). The sensing responses in N2flow were set as a baseline, and those toward xylene exposure were reflected in the change ofIds. As an example, the change ofIdsatVg= 10 V is shown in Figure S7 in the Supporting Information. ThePDPPHD-T3FET sensor responded to all three isomers of xylene over a wide concentration range using all six selected sensing features. Note that thePDPPHD-T3FET sensor could detect xylene isomers down to 40 ppm, lower than the NIOSH recommended long-term exposure limit of 100 ppm for xylenes. With increasing xylene concentration, the absolute values of the sensing responses increased. Most of the sensing parameters reverted to near-baseline levels after 5 min exposure to a pure N2flow. The six sensing parameters have different responses toward xylene exposure; specifically, ΔVth-eand ΔVth-hboth gave a positive response to xylene isomers, whereas Δμe/μeb, Δμh/μhb, ΔSSe, and ΔSShgave negative responses. For the same concentration of xylene isomers, the sensing features gave similar, but variable responses. For example, Δμe/μebat 40 ppm gave similar responses foro-xylene andm-xylene (μedecreased by 3.7% ± 0.3% and 3.6% ± 0.3%, respectively), but they differed forp-xylene (μedecreased by 4.3% ± 0.2%). While Δμh/μhbgave similar responses too-xylene andp-xylene (μhdecreased by 0.55% ± 0.05% and 0.56% ± 0.06%, respectively), they differed fromm-xylene (μhdecreased by 0.47% ± 0.1%). The differences in multiple sensing responses can discriminate structurally similar xylene isomers from one another.

Encouraged by the nature of the human olfactory system, where arrays of cross-reactive chemical sensors conjugated with pattern-recognition methods can achieve selective sensing of analytes,11the multiple sensing response of thePDPPHD-T3FET was used to provide a fingerprint for each xylene isomer. By this approach, the device features extracted from thePDPPHD-T3FET serve as an array of six virtual sensors, where each has its own cross-reactive behavior toward a specific isomer or mixture of isomers. Figure2g shows the principle component analysis (PCA) plot ofPDPPHD-T3FET with six sensing parameters in response to different xylene isomers at a concentration of 40 ppm. Details on the PCA can be found in the Experimental Section below. Figure2g shows each of the structurally similar xylene isomers can be clearly distinguished from the others by forming well-separated clusters in the principle component space. Note that the selective detection of structurally similar xylene isomers is achieved with a singlePDPPHD-T3FET sensor rather than arrays of sensors.5,8,12Furthermore, PCA was analyzed using either only electron or only hole sensing parameters (Figure2h,i, respectively). The use of only the electron sensing parameters results in a clear clustering of three xylene isomers. However, if only hole sensing parameters were used for the PCA analysis,o-xylene can be clearly distinguished fromp-xylene andm-xylene, butp-xylene andm-xylene are misclassified. Linear discriminant analysis (LDA) (for details, please refer to the Experimental Section) was used also to discriminate between xylene isomers. This analysis showed that they can be successfully classified with 100% sensitivity, specificity, and accuracy in most cases, even when only two sensing features of a sole ambipolar FET sensor had been used (Supporting Information, Table S1). Statistically differences (p-values) between canonical variables of the different xylene isomer classes were estimated by Student'st-test, all being <0.0001 (p< 0.05 being accepted as significant).

PDPPHD-T3-coated quartz-crystal microbalance (QCM) measurements (see Supporting Information, Section S4) showed increased mass after xylene exposure, suggesting that xylene molecules diffused and adsorbed onto the polymer film (Supporting Information, Figure S8). The QCM sensor recorded a very similar mass increase with the three xylene isomers at the same concentration, suggesting thatPDPPHD-T3has no appreciable selective adsorption. Therefore, it can be inferred that the selective detection of xylene isomers is based mainly on their different impacts on the electronic properties ofPDPPHD-T3.

After xylene exposure, the amount of adsorption on the polymer film increased rapidly over the first 8 s, corresponding to the diffusion and adsorption of xylene molecules into the shallow space of polymer film. Then the mass of xylene increased slowly, corresponding to their adsorption into the deep space of polymer film. Much more xylene accumulates in the shallow space than the deep space. Thus, sensing responses are largely due to adsorption in the shallow space. It takes 12 s in our FET sensor for one measurement, which is longer than the time taken for xylene molecules diffusing into the shallow space of polymer film. The adsorption equilibrium of xylene on the polymer film controls the sensing response. Therefore, the sensing processing is mainly limited by adsorption thermodynamics rather than by diffusion.

Motivated by the fact that mixed xylenes are widely used in industry, we wished to check whether the sensor can selectively detect specific xylene isomers in such a mixture(s). The three xylene isomers are miscible with each other in any ratio because of their similar physical properties. To selectively detect xylene mixtures (cocktails), an artificial neural network (ANN)-based model was used (for details, please refer to the Experimental Section). Six sensing parameters of a solePDPPHD-T3sensor toward ten xylene mixtures (the components of the mixed xylene are listed in Table S2 in the Supporting Information) were set as the input layer of the ANN. Optimized ANN parameters and functions are listed in Table S3 in the Supporting Information. The contents ofo-,m-, andp-xylenes in mixtures ranging from 0 to 1 were set as the output layer. The Euclidean distance between the estimated and real values was used to evaluate the discriminatory power of the sensor. Figure2j shows all the calculated Euclidean distances to be below 0.1, showing that the ANN model can correctly distinguish between ten xylene mixtures.

To understand the positive and negative responses achieved by thePDPPHD-T3FET sensor, density functional theory (DFT) was used for calculating the structures of a DPPHD-T3 dimer, i.e., a fragment ofPDPPHD-T3, and its complexes with xylene isomers by applying the B3LYP/6-311+G* level. The optimized geometries ofo-xylene,m-xylene, andp-xylene adsorbed onto DPPHD-T3 dimers are shown inFigure3. All electron-deficient xylene isomers are adsorbed on the electron-rich thiophene units due to donor–acceptor and van der Waal's interactions. The different methyl substitution positions in the benzene ring produce different molecular symmetries and electron-density distribution of the isomers, and thus the optimized position of the xylene isomers onPDPPHD-T3differs from each other.

In general, for an ambipolar FET, the metal-electrode Fermi level (EF) is located between the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) and lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO). The energy differences between the metal electrodeEFand the HOMO and LUMO levels lead to the formation of hole- and electron-injection barriers, respectively, which affects their injection rates.13DFT-calculated HOMO and LUMO energies of the DPPHD-T3 dimer before and after the adsorption of xylene isomers are given inTable2and the corresponding molecular orbitals are plotted in Figure S9 of the Supporting Information. After adsorbing xylene isomers, the HOMO and LUMO energies of the DPPHD-T3 dimer all increase, resulting in a decrease in the hole-injection barrier and an increase in the electron-injection barrier (Figure3d). When thePDPPHD-T3FET is operated in hole-accumulation mode (Vgsweeps from a positive to a negative voltage), a decrease in the hole-injection barrier makes the hole-conduction channel open at a higher positive gate voltage, while an increase in the electron-injection barrier makes the electron-conduction channel close at a more positive gate voltage. As a result, theVth-eandVth-hshift to a higher positive gate voltage after xylene exposure. These results agree with the experimental sensing response ofPDPPHD-T3to xylene isomers (Figure2a,d). The different xylene isomers have different impacts on the HOMO/LUMO energies ofPDPPHD-T3. These differences lead to differences in the polymer FET multiple transfer properties that result in distinct sensing patterns for the selective sensing of structurally similar xylene isomers. Note that the DFT calculations are based on the molecule in vacuum and omit the interaction between polymer chains to simplify the calculation. In the real polymer film, xylene-adsorption-induced changes of the polymer electric properties are more complex and are also affected by molecular aggregation of the polymers. Nevertheless, DFT calculation can be used to explain the trend of xylene-adsorption-induced changes of polymer electric properties.

To support the results from the DFT calculations, complexes ofPDPPHD-T3polymer and xylene isomers were examined by Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy (for details, please refer to Section S7 of the Supporting Information). Figure S10a of the Supporting Information shows the FTIR spectrum of the drop-castPDPPHD-T3film measured under argon flow. The stretching vibrations of the aryl ketone CO and CN bonds of diketopyrrolopyrrole appear at 1673 and 1220 cm−1. The peaks at 2922 and 2853 cm−1are stretching vibrations of CH3and CH2of the hexyldecyl ligand of diketopyrrolopyrrole. The peaks at 1566 and 1445 cm−1correspond to asymmetric and symmetric CC stretching vibrations, respectively, whereas those at 1335 cm−1correspond to CC stretching vibrations in the thiophene ring. A peak at 3064 cm−1is due to the stretching vibrations of the CH of the aromatic rings.14As predicted, after exposure to different xylene isomers, more than half of the peaks ofPDPPHD-T3(marked in bold and violet color in Figure S10 in the Supporting Information) had shifted. For instance, the stretching vibrations of aryl ketone CO (1673 cm−1), the asymmetric and symmetric CC (1566, 1445 cm−1), the CN bonds (1220 cm−1), and the CC bonds (1335 cm−1) ofPDPPHD-T3polymer all shifted to a lower wavenumber by 7–15 cm−1. This is evidence of interaction between the xylene isomers and the polymer backbone. However, the stretching vibrations of the CH2peak of the hexyldecyl ligand shifted from 2922 cm−1to a higher wavenumber by 9–11 cm−1due to van der Waals interactions between the hexyldecyl ligand and xylene. Moreover, the interaction between the xylene and thePDPPHD-T3polymer is reversible because the peak shifts back to its original position during the desorption step, i.e., xylene is flushed out by argon flow (Figure S11, Supporting Information).

ThePDPPHD-T3polymer film is also swollen by the diffusion of xylenes. Specifically, xylene-induced polymer film swelling will result in less-tightly packedPDPPHD-T3nanofibers, as also a decrease the order of polymer chain packing, resulting in an increase in film resistance. Therefore, both the electron and hole mobility of thePDPPHD-T3polymer film will decrease after xylene exposure, as was seen in the xylene-exposure experiments (Figure2c,e).

In summary, we have developed an FET sensor based on an ambipolar semiconducting polymer to detect xylene isomer vapors at 40 ppm, i.e., below the long-term permissible exposure limit of 100 ppm recommended by NIOSH. The ambipolar FET generates multiple sensing parameters in electron and hole conduction toward xylene isomers. Using a combined pattern-recognition method along with multiple sensing parameters from a single ambipolar FET, chemically and structurally similar xylene isomers, as well as binary and ternary xylene mixtures, can be precisely identified. The sensing mechanism was investigated by DFT calculations showing that both HOMO and LUMO energy levels of the polymer increase with the amount of adsorbed xylene isomer. As a result, the hole-injection barrier of the ambipolar FET decreases, facilitating hole transport, whereas the electron-injection barrier increases, suppressing electron transport. Complexes ofPDPPHD-T3polymer and xylene isomers have been experimentally monitored by FTIR spectroscopy. The electrical properties are also affected by the swelling of the polymer film due to xylene diffusion. Our investigations could lead to the development of cost-effective and low-power sensors for sensitive and selective detection of structurally similar chemicals and their mixtures.

Fabrication of the FET Sensor:PDPPHD-T3polymer was synthesized and characterized as reported previously,10and as detailed in Section S1 and S2 and Figure S1–S6 in the Supporting Information.PDPPHD-T3FETs were prepared on (100) silicon wafers capped with 300 nm thermal oxide. A Ti/Au (10/200 nm) bottom-gate electrode was deposited by electron beam evaporation. 49 pairs of circular interdigitated source and drain Au (200 nm) electrodes were prepared using photolithography and electron-beam evaporation. The outer diameter of the circular electrode area was 3000 μm. The gap between the two adjacent electrodes (channel length) and the width of each electrode were 25 and 5 μm, respectively. Then, the plasma-treated silicon wafers were treated with oxygen plasma for 5 min. The silicon wafers were immersed in octyltrichlorosilane (OTS)/toluene solution (40 × 10−3m, 20 mL) for 10 h in a N2glove box. Finally,PDPPHD-T3films were deposited on the OTS-treated substrates by spin-coating using aPDPPHD-T3solution (8 mg mL−1) in chloroform. The polymer film thickness was ≈320 nm measured by a step profiler. The surface morphology of the spin-coatedPDPPHD-T3film was characterized by scanning electron microscopy (Zeiss Ultra-Plus FEG-SEM).

FET-Sensor Measurements: ThePDPPHD-T3FET sensor was loaded into a stainless-steel chamber with a volume of ≈170 cm3. The vapors of theo-,m-, andp-xylenes were produced by a computer-controlled bubbler system. N2was used as a carrier gas as well as a reference gas. The flow rate was kept at 3 L min−1during the experiment. Xylene mixtures were prepared by mixing liquids of pureo-,m-, andp-xylenes at selected (volume) ratios (Supporting Information, Table S2). The vapor concentrations of the xylene mixtures were set asPa/Po= 0.05, wherePaandPostand for the xylene mixture VOC's partial pressure and saturated vapor pressure, respectively. Source–drain current (Ids) versus gate voltage (Vg) measurements (swept between 10 and −60 V with 0.5 V steps and −70 V constant source–drain voltage,Vds) were carried out using a Keithley 2636A system SourceMeter and a 3706 system Switch/Multimeter. Extraction of the sensing parameters following the FET measurements are detailed in Section S3 of the Supporting Information.

Computational Methods: Gaussian 09 soft was used to calculate the molecular structure, the HOMO and LUMO energy of formation of complexes ofPDPPHD-T3with each xylene isomer, using a DFT method at the B3LYP/6-311+G* level.

Pattern-Recognition Methods: PCA and LDA for xylene isomers used JMP 10 software (SAS Institute, Inc.). PCA finds projection weights for sensor response data that maximize the total response variance in principal components, where the dimension capturing the greatest variance is given by PC1, and the dimension capturing the second greatest variance (subject to being orthogonal to PC1) is given by PC2, etc. LDA finds linear combinations of sensing features that separate two or more classes of objects. In binary classification, LDA predicts membership in two categories based on known continuous sensing responses.

Artificial Neural Networks: A feed-forward three-layered multilayer perceptron (input, hidden, and output) ANN model was used for the classification of xylene mixtures. The six sensing parameters of each xylene mixture at a vapor concentration ofPa/Po= 0.05 were set as the input nodes of the ANN. The three xylene isomers were encoded with dependent vectors in a 3D space and were set as the three neurons in the output layer. The ranges of the vector lengths of the three xylene isomers were set from 0 to 1, corresponding to the content of a determined isomer in the xylene mixtures. A vector length equal to 0 means that a specific isomer in the xylene mixture was absent, while a vector length equal to 1 means the detected mixture contains only one xylene isomer. The database obtained from a solePDPPHD-T3sensor was randomly split into two datasets, the learning dataset and the verification dataset. The Euclidean distance between the estimated and the real vector was used to calculate the discriminatory power of thePHPPHD–T3sensor toward the mixed xylenes. Optimized ANN parameters and functions are listed in Table S3 in the Supporting Information.

This research received funding from the Horizon 2020 ICT Program under the SNIFFPHONE (Grant Agreement No. 644031). The authors acknowledge the Israel Council for Higher Education for a partial support of B.W.'s postdoctoral fellowship. The authors are grateful to Yi Ren for his help in Matlab programming, Dr. Linfeng Chen for his help in SEM measurements, and Dr. Guankui Long for profound discussions on DFT calculations. C.R.M. acknowledges support from the Australian Research Council (DP130102616). Part of this research was undertaken on the SAXS/WAXS beamline at the Australian Synchrotron, Victoria, Australia. C.R.M. and M.M.N. thank Dr. Eliot Gann for assistance with GIWAXS measurements and data analysis. T.T.D., J.C., and P.S. wish to thank the CRC for Polymers at Queensland University of Technology (QUT) for equipment support. P.S. also acknowledges financial support from the Australian Research Council (Grant No. FT130101337).

As a service to our authors and readers, this journal provides supporting information supplied by the authors. Such materials are peer reviewed and may be re-organized for online delivery, but are not copy-edited or typeset. Technical support issues arising from supporting information (other than missing files) should be addressed to the authors.

Please note: The publisher is not responsible for the content or functionality of any supporting information supplied by the authors. Any queries (other than missing content) should be directed to the corresponding author for the article.

Volume28,Issue21

June 1, 2016

Pages4012-4018

Copyright © 1999-2025John Wiley & Sons, Incor related companies. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence technologies or similar technologies.

Your password has been changed

Enter your email address below.

Please check your email for instructions on resetting your password.
                    If you do not receive an email within 10 minutes, your email address may not be registered,
                    and you may need to create a new Wiley Online Library account.

Can't sign in? Forgot your username?

Enter your email address below and we will send you your username

If the address matches an existing account you will receive an email with instructions to retrieve your username