Scheme 1.Conceptual structure of DA–MIP-coated gate FET. (A) Schematic diagram of DA–MIP-coated gate FET. The DA–MIP-coated Augate electrodewas extended fromMOSFET. (B) Chemicalcompositionof DA–MIP coated by SI-ATRP on an Au electrode. Bromo-terminatedalkanethiolSAM was tethered asATRP initiatoron the Au electrode, and then DA–MIP was synthesized with forming VPBA-DA complexes. (C) Equilibrium betweenphenylboronic acidderivative anddiolcompound.

Fig. 1.Impedance analyses for NIP- and DA–MIP-coated Au electrodes.Nyquist plotsof (A) NIP- and (B) DA–MIP-coated Au electrodes at different concentrations of DA from 0 nM to 10 μM. The inset in (B) shows the equivalent circuit of DA–MIP-coated Au surface (CE: counter electrode, Rsol: resistance of solution, RCT: resistance of charge transfer, Zw: Warburg impedance, CDL: capacitance ofelectric double layer, WE: working electrode).

Table 1. Impedimetric parameters in RC circuit of NIP- and DA–MIP-coated Au electrodes at different concentrations of DA.

Fig. 2.Thresholdgate voltageshift (ΔVG) for DA–MIP-coated gateFETat 4 mA of IDobtained from ID-VGcurve with changes in pH from 5–12. Sigmoidal plots of DA–MIP-coated gateFETwere obtained without DA in each pH solution (triangle), and with 10 μM of DA (circle). Each approximated formula of sigmoidal plots was shown in the figure.

Fig. 3.(A) Change in gatesurface potential(Vout) of DA–MIP-coated gateFETwith different concentrations ofcatecholaminesat a constant ID(100 μA). Four types ofcatecholamines, DA (red line),LD(blue line),NE(orange line) and EP (green line), were added at each time indicated by arrows. The NIP-coated gateFETwas used as a control upon adding DA (black line). (B) Plots of shift in gate surface potential (ΔVout) at different concentrations of addedcatecholaminesbased on the data shown inA. Approximate curves were fitted by Langmuiradsorption isotherm. ΔVoutwere analyzed for the DA–MIP-coated gate FETs, where four types ofcatecholamines, DA (red), LD (blue),NE(orange) and EP (green), were added with different concentrations. The NIP-coated gate FET was used as a control upon adding DA (black). (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.).

Table 2.Kinetic parameterscalculated from the approximate curves shown inFig. 3B, which were based on Langmuir model.

Supplementary material

Such a graphene oxide functionalized MIP sensor could provide an LOD of 20 nM. Kajisa et al. (2018b) synthesized a glucose imprinted hydrogel, containing vinylphenylboronic acid as functional monomer, on an electrode by radical copolymerization, which takes overnight. The templated glucose was subsequently removed with acidic alcohol solution and the hydrogel MIP coated electrode was used as gate in a field effect transistor (FET) sensor exhibiting an LOD of 3 μM.

Cookies are used by this site.Cookie Settings

All content on this site: Copyright ©2025or its licensors and contributors. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. For all open access content, the relevant licensing terms apply.

These cookies are necessary for the website to function and cannot be switched off in our systems. They are usually only set in response to actions made by you which amount to a request for services, such as setting your privacy preferences, logging in or filling in forms. You can set your browser to block or alert you about these cookies, but some parts of the site will not then work. These cookies do not store any personally identifiable information.

These cookies enable the website to provide enhanced functionality and personalisation. They may be set by us or by third party providers whose services we have added to our pages. If you do not allow these cookies then some or all of these services may not function properly.

These cookies allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors move around the site.

These cookies may be set through our site by our advertising partners. They may be used by those companies to build a profile of your interests and show you relevant adverts on other sites. If you do not allow these cookies, you will experience less targeted advertising.

Outline

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bios.2018.07.014Get rights and content

Full text access

•A well-designed biointerface enabled the selective and quantitative detection of dopamine using a potentiometric biosensor.•Dopamine-templatedmolecularly imprinted polymer(DA–MIP) was synthesized on the gate of a field-effect transistor.•DA–MIP was controlled to ca. 60 nm thickness by surface-initiatedatom transfer radical polymerization.•A detection range of 40 nM–20 μM for dopamine detection was achieved while the smaller responses to other catecholamines.

A well-designed biointerface enabled the selective and quantitative detection of dopamine using a potentiometric biosensor.

Dopamine-templatedmolecularly imprinted polymer(DA–MIP) was synthesized on the gate of a field-effect transistor.

DA–MIP was controlled to ca. 60 nm thickness by surface-initiatedatom transfer radical polymerization.

A detection range of 40 nM–20 μM for dopamine detection was achieved while the smaller responses to other catecholamines.

We report a well-designedbiointerfaceenabling the selective and quantitative detection of dopamine (DA) using apotentiometricbiosensor. To enhance the detectionselectivityof DA, a DA-templatedmolecularly imprinted polymer(DA–MIP) was synthesized on the extended Augate electrodeof a field-effect transistor (FET) biosensor. For a quantitative DA analysis, the thickness of the DA–MIP was controlled to ca. 60 nm by surface-initiatedatom transfer radical polymerization(SI-ATRP). In this process, the DA–MIP was copolymerized with vinylphenylboronic acid (vinyl-PBA), inducingmolecular chargesat the biointerface of theFETgate electrode. These charges were generated by the diol-binding between PBA and dopamine (a catecholamine), and were directly detected as a change insurface potential. In fact, the surface potential at the gate of the DA–MIP-coated FET responded significantly to DA added at concentrations ranging from 40 nM to 20 μM, whereas that of a non-imprinted polymer (NIP)-coated FET hardly changed over this range. Moreover, by measuring thekinetic parametersandelectrochemical propertiesof well-designed devices with various added catecholamines, we confirmed that the DA–MIP-coated FET biosensor selectively and quantitatively detects DA.

Download:Download high-res image (187KB)Download:Download full-size image

Catecholamines are distributed in theadrenal medulla,brain, and sympathetic nerves (Brown and Makman, 1972,Emlen et al., 1972,Weinshilboum et al., 1971). They play an important role asneurotransmittersin thecentral nervous system, and are secreted as adrenal medullary hormones in the blood, raising the blood pressure andblood sugar level(Tempel and Leibowitz, 1994). Starting fromtyrosine, catecholamines are metabolized successively tol-dopa (LD), dopamine (DA), norepinephrine (NE), and epinephrine (EP) in the metabolic pathway. Among these metabolites, DA is a treatment modality in acute congestive heart failure and renal failure, so is a useful compound in the pharmacological field (Lokhandwala and Barrett, 1982,Varriale and Mossavi, 1997). The addition of acarboxyl group,hydroxyl group, andmethyl groupto the side chain of DA yields LD, NE, and EP, respectively. Catecholamine concentrations in blood and urine have been determined by high-performanceliquid chromatography(HPLC), which quantifies the catecholamine concentration in vivo (Mori, 1981,Helm et al., 1982,Minami et al., 1984).

Several methods that distinguish between the different catecholamine structures have been reported (Nozaki et al., 1996,Njagi et al., 2010,Hormozi-Nezhad et al., 2017). As a non-enzymatic detection method, catecholamines can be specifically detected by molecularly imprinted polymer (MIP), abiomimeticmaterial that mimics the enzyme–substrate relationship. Molecular cavities in polymer have been fabricated by polymerizing amonomermixed with a substrate (Wulff and Sarhan, 1972,Andersson et al., 1985,Sellergren et al., 1985). To improve the specificity of MIPs, researchers have attempted to increase thecrosslinkerdensity and design themonomercompositionby exploiting thecovalent bondsbetween the functionalmonomerand the substrate, theionic interaction, theelectrostatic interaction, and thehydrogen bonds(Wulff, 1995). MIP-based catecholamine detection methods include an indirect method intermediated by anenzymeandchromophores, and a swelling–shrinking-based detection method (Suedee et al., 2006,Lakshmi et al., 2009,Mao et al., 2011). However, directelectrochemical detectionby a MIP has been rarely reported. For quantitative DA measurement, this technique requires precise control of the polymerization conditions and the film thickness of the MIP at the electrode interface (Panasyuk-Delaney et al., 2001).

Potentiometricelectrochemical devicesbased on field-effect transistors (FETs) can realize non-labeled, quantitative, low-cost biosensors (Bergveld, 1970,Fromherz and Offenhausser, 1991,Lahav et al., 2001). By virtue of the field effect, a charge change in the gate vicinity of an FET manifests as a change in the source–drain current up to thethreshold voltageof the FET, after which the source–drain current remains constant. FET-based techniques have quantified ions, proteins,nucleic acids, and charged cells with high sensitivity (Sakata et al., 2004; Star et al., 2006;Sakata and Matsuse, 2017;Rothberg et al., 2011;Kajisa and Sakata, 2014). Furthermore, an extended-gate FET, in which thegate electrodeis separated from the semiconductor device, allows free choice of the gateelectrode material, which can be grown by a diverse range of surface modification methods (Sakata et al., 2005a,Sakata et al., 2005b). Our group quantitatively detected varioussaccharidesat concentrations of order 10 μM using a chemically modified extended-gate FET with a modified Au gate electrode. In that study, the gate was modified by aphenylboronic acidself-assembled monolayer (PBA-SAM) (Kajisa and Sakata, 2014). The FET with the PBA-SAM-coated gate directly measured the changes in the negative charge as theboron atomsaltered from a tertiary toquaternary structure. This change was driven bydiesterbinding of PBA with sugar (adiolcompound). Using the same PBA equilibrium principle, glucose was also detected at high sensitivity by an FET with a hydrogel-coated gate, formed by polymerizing hydrogel-containing vinyl-PBA on an extended Au gate electrode (Kajisa and Sakata, 2017). As a PBA molecule can also bind to the diol group of catecholamines, the PBA equilibrium mechanism has also been exploited in catecholamine detection (Paugam et al., 1994).

Against this background, we propose that DA can be directly measured with high sensitivity andselectivityamong structurally similar catecholamines using a DA-templated MIP–FET. To quantify the affinity andbinding constantof the DA–MIP, we precisely control the thickness and adhesiveness of the MIP layer at the Auelectrode surfaceby surface-initiated atom transfer radical polymerization (SI-ATRP), which directly forms a hydrogelnanolayeron the Au substrate.

All chemicals were obtained from commercial suppliers and used without furtherpurification. 3-(3,4-Dihydroxyphenyl)-L-alanine (LD), 3-hydroxytyramine hydrochloride (DA), L-noradrenaline bitartrate (NE), and L-adrenaline (EP) were purchased from Tokyo Kasei Industry (Tokyo, Japan). The MIP was fabricated from differentmonomers:N-[3-(dimethylamino)propyl]methacrylamide (DMAPM, Sigma-Aldrich), 4-vinylphenylboronic acid (VPBA, Tokyo Kasei Industry), orethylene glycol dimethacrylate(EGDM, WakoPureChemical). The solvent wasN,N-dimethylformamide (DMF, Wako Pure Chemical). The initiator for atom transferradical polymerization(ATRP) was bis[2-(2-bromoisobutyryloxy)undecyl]disulfide(Sigma-Aldrich). The catalysts were CuBr2and tris(2-pyridylmethyl)amine (TPMA), and the reducing agent wasascorbic acid(Nacalai Tesque). Phosphate-buffered saline without bivalent ions (PBS-, Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used as thebuffer solution. An n-channel metal-oxide-semiconductor field-effect transistor (MOSFET, 2N7002) was purchased from NXP Semiconductors. Ultrapure water (Ul-pure, Komatsu Electronics Co., Ltd.) was used in all experiments.

Ananolayerof DA-MIP was fabricated by SI-ATRP, a controlled living radicalpolymerization method. First, anATRP initiator(Br-SAM) was formed by immersing an Au electrode in 1 mM bis[2-(2-bromoisobutyryloxy)undecyl] disulfide/ethanol solution. The DA–MIP was polymerized by mixing 105 mM of DMAPM, 120 mM of VPBA, 540 mM of EGDM, and 188 mM of DA. Themonomerswere dissolved in DMF/water (7.5 ml/2.5 ml), and DA was added followingdegassingby N2bubbling to prevent the self-oxidation of DA. A non-imprinted polymer (NIP) was prepared as described for DA–MIP but omitting the DA. After mixing themonomersand DA for 1 h with N2bubbling, CuBr2and TPMA were added to the final concentrations of 1 and 5 mM in the monomer solution, respectively. Finally, 10 mM ofascorbic acid(reducing agent) was added to the solution in a glove box, before immersing the Br-SAM-coated Au electrode. Polymerization was performed at 40 °C for 18 h. After polymerization, the treated Au substrate was washed in methanol and water to remove the unreacted monomers and DA, then immersed in 0.1 M HCl and 50%(v/v) methanol for more than 3 days to remove the DA from the pre-MIP hydrogel. At the end of this period, the DAtemplatewas formed in the MIP hydrogel.

Thesurface elemental compositionsof Au, Au with an immobilized ATRP initiator, and DA–MIP-modified Au were analyzed via X-rayphotoelectron spectroscopy(XPS; JPS-9010MC, JEOL). Excitation X-rays were produced from a monochromatic Al Kα X-ray source at a take-off angle of 90°. To examine the accuracy of removing template from polymerized DA–MIP, ATR–FTIR measurements were performed using FT/IR 6300 (JASCO, Japan). ZnSe was used as the crystal plate, and all spectra were recorded in the wavenumber range 4000–800 cm−1.

The thicknesses of the Br-SAM, polymerized DA–MIP, and NIP on the Au electrode were calculated by ellipsometric measurements using a rotating ellipsometer (model M2000U, J.A. Woollam Co., Inc.) and WVASE32 software. The wavelength of the incident light ranged from 200 to 1600 nm, and the incidence angle was 65, 70, 75, or 80°. To calculate the thickness of each layer, the experimentally obtained spectrum was fitted by the Cauchy model, which approximates the dispersion of therefractive index. The thickness was determined as the average of at least three measurements obtained from different substrates or locations.

To clarify the characteristics of the Au gate electrode with a polymerized DA–MIP membrane, we measured the capacitance changes in the fabricated polymer layer at each step of the ATRP process, and compared the impedance changes in DA–MIP and NIP as the DA concentration was varied. The capacitances were measured by an LCR meter (E4980A, Keysight technologies) operated at 50 Hz and abias voltageof 10 mV. The measurement buffer was PBS buffer (pH 7.4) and thereference electrodewas an Ag/AgCl electrode. The impedance was measured by an electrochemical analyzer (614E, BAS Instruments) over a wide range of frequencies (10 mHz to 1 MHz). The measurement medium was PBS buffer (pH 7.4) containing 1 mM ofpotassiumferricyanide/potassiumferrocyanideasredox mediators, and the measurements started from 300 s after DA addition. The reference and counter electrodes were an Ag/AgCl electrode and aplatinum electrode, respectively. To determine the pKaof the PBA molecules in DA–MIP, a DA–MIP-coated Au electrode was connected to an n-channel MOSFET device (input capacitance: 31 pF) and the shift in thethreshold voltage(ΔVT) at a drain current (ID) of 4 mA and adrain voltage(VD) of 2 V was measured using a semiconductor parameter analyzer (B1500A, Keysight Technologies). During the ΔVTmeasurements, the 100 mMsodiumphosphate buffer was increased from pH 5–12, with or without 10 μM DA, and the pKawas calculated by fitting the ΔVTversus pH data with a sigmoidal curve.

The DA-substrate specificity of the FET with a DA–MIP-coated gate was evaluated in a mixture of catecholamines using a real-timemonitoring system. For this purpose, 500 μl of PBS buffer (pH = 7.4) was poured onto a DA–MIP-coated gate surface equipped with a 12-mm-diameter glass ring, and equilibrated until the gatesurface potentialwas stabilized. After stabilizing the gate surface potential, each catecholamine was gradually titrated to a final concentration range of 10 nM to 20 μM. To suppress the spike signals in the gate surface potential induced by sample addition, the introduced volume was 1/100 of the total volume of the measurement solution. To examine the response to DA in a biological fluid, 500 μl of normal pooled-human serum (Kohjin Bio, Japan) was used in place of PBS buffer. The change in surface potential (ΔVout) at the gate was measured at a constantIDof 100 μA using a source follower circuit (with the Ag/AgCl reference electrode grounded). The detected ΔVoutwas thus regarded as the change in the source–gate voltage (ΔVS), which equals the -ΔVTof an FET. This system monitored the surface potential of the FET in real time, and ΔVoutwas determined as the surface potential shifted, starting at 300 s after catecholamine addition.

To fabricate the FET with the DA–MIP-coated gate, a MIP hydrogel was synthesized on the surface of the Au electrode, following the modification of bromo-terminatedalkanethiolSAMs as the ATRP initiator.Scheme 1a and billustrate the FET with the DA–MIP-coated gate and thechemical structureof the DA–MIP obtained by SI-ATRP, respectively. To prepare a thin layer of DA–MIP, the DAtemplatemolecule was mixed into a solution containing afunctional monomer(vinylphenylboronic acid). Similarly to other catecholamines, DA rapidly self-polymerizes while forming the ring structure of 5,6-dihydroxyindole by anoxidationprocess (Liebscher et al., 2013,Shi et al., 2016). To prevent such self-oxidation of DA, the DA–MIP was polymerized in a nitrogen atmosphere with all air strictly removed. The surface of each Auelectrode modifiedwith the SI-ATRP initiator–SAM and DA–MIP was analyzed byXPS,ellipsometry, andcapacitance measurements. Theelemental compositionof the Au surface changed during each step of the chemical modification (XPS analysis; seeFig. S1in the Supplementary information). The peak intensities ofelemental carbonand bromine increased after coating the SI-ATRP initiator on the Au electrode, while the Au peak decreased. Furthermore,MIP synthesisby SI-ATRP increased the intensity of the carbon peak and simultaneously decreased the intensities of thebromo groupand Au peaks. These results confirm that SI-ATRP formed a polymer layer on the Au gate electrode of the FET. In addition, to confirm the removal of the templated DA from the DA–MIP-coated Au electrode, the NIP and MIP polymer-coated Au electrodes before and after treatment with an acidic solution were analyzed via ATR–FTIR measurements. Supplementary InformationFig. S2shows the ATR–FTIR spectra of the NIP- and MIP-coated Au electrodes before and after 3 days of immersion in HCl/MeOH, which was used as a template removal solution. After immersion, the peak characteristic of the stretching mode ofboronatediesterbetween 1100 and 1160 cm−1disappeared in the case of DA–MIP and remained the same in the case of the control sample, i.e., NIP. This result indicates that the complex between PBA and DA was dissociated byDA releasefrom theMIP gel(Smith and Northrop, 2014). Furthermore, the two peaks in DA–MIP, which corresponded to the stretching modes of ester at 1160 and 1734 cm−1, slightly shifted to 1171 and 1730 cm−1, respectively, due to a decrease in the interaction between PBA and DA after the template removal treatment; however, the peak positions remained unchanged in NIP-coated Au. This result also supports the successful removal of DA. To more deeply understand the DA–MIP layer, the layer thickness was determined by fitting to an optical model using an ellipsometer. The experimental spectra of the azimuth (Ψ), defining the difference between the p- and s-polarized light angles, were well fitted to the spectra simulated by the Cauchy model (Fig. S3in the Supplementary information). From these data, the thicknesses of the ATRP-initiator SAMs, NIP, and DA–MIP were determined as 1.6 ± 0.0 nm, 57.3 ± 1.3 nm, and 61.3 ± 4.1 nm, respectively. Furthermore, the capacitance of each organic layer on the Au surface decreased from 1.60 μF (electric double-layer on the bare Au surface) to 1.24 μF in the ATRP-initiator–SAM-modified Au electrode, 450 nF in the NIP-coated Au electrode, and 190 nF in the DA–MIP-coated Au electrode. The capacitance of the interface of the organic-layer-coated Au electrode (Cint) is thought to decrease with increasing thickness of the modified organic layer, and is generally described as(1)Cint=εOLSdOL,whereεOLanddOLdenote therelative permittivityand thickness of the modified organic layer, respectively. The thickness and capacitance of each layer are tabulated inTable S1. The theoretical relative permittivities calculated from the thicknesses and capacitances were approximately 3 in the Br–SAM layer, 58 in the NIP/Br–SAM layer, and 20 in the DA–MIP/Br–SAM layer on the Au electrode. Therelative permittivityof the densely packed Br–SAM was similar to those of other alkanethiol SAMs, and those of the hydrogels in the DA–MIP and NIP layers were raised by water absorption and consequent swelling (Rampi et al., 1998,Esch et al., 1999,Yeow et al., 2010). The relative permittivity was lower in DA–MIP than in NIP despite the nearly identical thicknesses of the two layers. This may be explained by differences in the polymer compositions and structures of the randomblock copolymer. After complexing with DA, a large proportion of the VPBA monomer in DA–MIP was negatively charged, whereas in the NIP monomer solution, most of the VPBA was neutral (Yu and Eisenberg, 1997). Consequently, in the MIP case, VPBA was copolymerized with DMAPM viaelectrostatic interactionwith the amino-group side chain of DMAPM, whereas the NIP synthesis was largely affected by π–π interactions between the VPBA molecules. Therefore, the differentdielectric constantsof DA–MIP and NIP might be explained by the morphological differences in the hydrogels of a molecularly imprinted polymer and a non-imprinted randomcopolymer.Download:Download high-res image (822KB)Download:Download full-size imageScheme 1.Conceptual structure of DA–MIP-coated gate FET. (A) Schematic diagram of DA–MIP-coated gate FET. The DA–MIP-coated Augate electrodewas extended fromMOSFET. (B) Chemicalcompositionof DA–MIP coated by SI-ATRP on an Au electrode. Bromo-terminatedalkanethiolSAM was tethered asATRP initiatoron the Au electrode, and then DA–MIP was synthesized with forming VPBA-DA complexes. (C) Equilibrium betweenphenylboronic acidderivative anddiolcompound.

The DA–MIP-coated Au electrode was electrochemically characterized byelectrochemical impedance spectroscopy(EIS), and thesemiconductor propertiesof the FET with a DA–MIP-coated gate were examined using a semiconductor parameter analyzer. First, the layered interfaces of the NIP- and DA–MIP-coated Au electrodes were clarified by EIS. The impedance of each Au surface was measured by changing the DA concentration. According to the modulus of impedance in the NIP- and DA–MIP-coated Au electrodes, which increases with increasing frequency at lower frequencies (below Hz order), theredox reactionof the mediator proceeded at the Au electrode (Fig. S4in the Supplementary information).Fig. 1showsNyquist plotsof the NIP- and DA–MIP-coated Au electrodes, which resolve the impedance into real and imaginary parts, in the frequency range from 10–1 MHz. A typical capacitive semicircle with a time constant (τ=RC) appears at higher frequencies in both plots, owing toelectron transferinduced by theredox reactionof the ferricyanide/ferrocyanide mediator with the Au electrode. For the DA–MIP-coated Au electrode in the absence and presence of 100 nM DA, the diagonal line at lower frequencies corresponds to the diffusion-limited Warburg impedance (Fig. 1B). Therefore, the equivalent circuit may be a series connection of thecharge transfer resistanceand the Warburg impedance, in parallel with the electric double-layer capacitance of the Au electrode (Fig. 1B, inset). Increasing the DA concentration enlarged the capacitive semicircle for the DA–MIP-coated Au electrode, but not for the NIP-coated Au electrode. Assuming the resistance–capacitance (RC) circuit model, the charge transfer resistance (RCT) was estimated from the intersection of the semicircle plot with the X-axis, and the electric double-layer capacitance (CEDL) was calculated from the frequency corresponding to the vertex of the semicircle (fmax) andRCTas(2)fmax=12πRCTCEDL.Download:Download high-res image (332KB)Download:Download full-size imageFig. 1.Impedance analyses for NIP- and DA–MIP-coated Au electrodes.Nyquist plotsof (A) NIP- and (B) DA–MIP-coated Au electrodes at different concentrations of DA from 0 nM to 10 μM. The inset in (B) shows the equivalent circuit of DA–MIP-coated Au surface (CE: counter electrode, Rsol: resistance of solution, RCT: resistance of charge transfer, Zw: Warburg impedance, CDL: capacitance ofelectric double layer, WE: working electrode).

Table 1summarizes the parameters of the RC circuits of the NIP- and DA–MIP-coated Au electrodes at different DA concentrations. As the DA concentration increased, theCEDLremained unchanged in both electrodes, whereasRCTincreased in the DA–MIP-coated Au electrode but not in the NIP-coated Au electrode. This indicates gradual inhibition of theredox reactionby the binding of DA and PBA molecules in the MIP, which blocks the DA–MIP cavities and prevents theredox mediatorfrom passing through the DA–MIP membrane. On the other hand, theRCTvalues were several times larger in the NIP-coated Au electrode than in the DA–MIP-coated Au electrode, and were unchanged by DA addition. This behavior might occur because the redox mediator cannot easily reach the Au surface through the NIP membrane (Fig. 1A). The EIS analysis clarified and electrochemically characterized the polymerthin filmon the Au electrode of the NIP- and DA–MIP-coated Au electrodes, and the DA binding behavior in DA–MIP was observed as an impedance change.Table 1. Impedimetric parameters in RC circuit of NIP- and DA–MIP-coated Au electrodes at different concentrations of DA.Empty CellDopamine concentration (μM)parametersfmax(mHz)CEDL(μF)RCT(MΩ)NIP014.70.7015.50.114.70.7015.5114.70.7514.51014.70.7314.9DA–MIP056.21.372.070.121.51.435.17114.71.706.361014.71.447.52

The DA–MIP-coated gate FET was further characterized using a semiconductor parameter analyzer.Fig. 2plots the ΔVTvalues as functions of pH with and without DA addition. TheVTversus pH curve was successfully fitted by a sigmoidal function (Eq.(3)), which is based on the Hill equation (Hill, 1910):(3)ΔVT=ΔVTmax−ΔVTmax+ΔVTbase1+(pHpKa)n,where ΔVT baseand ΔVT maxare the approximate minimum and maximum ΔVT, respectively,nis theHill coefficient, and pKais theacid dissociation constantof DA–MIP. The pKavalues of DA–MIP in the absence and presence of 10 μM DA were calculated as 10.2 and 8.14, respectively. The difference might be attributable to equilibrium between the PBA and the diol compound. PBA has four different equilibrium states in association with the diol compound, and theboron atomis negatively charged in PBA itself and upon binding to the diol compound (Scheme 1c). In the PBA of DA–MIP, the changing negative charge of the boron atoms induced a ΔVTshift in the positive direction. Thus, the above values denote the pKaof PBA itself and the pKaof the PBA–DA complex. The pKaof PBA in DA–MIP (state 2 inScheme 1c) was higher than the pKaof PBA molecules (8.8) reported in earlier studies (Springsteen and Wang, 2002,Yan et al., 2004). It is suspected that the pKaof a PBA molecule tethered in DA–MIP on the Au surface differs from that of PBA molecules inbulksolution. Thehydrolysis reactionfield should be more limited for immobilized PBA molecules in the local environment of the MIP hydrogel at the Au interface than for PBA molecules, which can freely move through bulk solution. However, in the PBA–DA complex, DA addition shifted the sigmoidal curve to near-neutral pKa(Fig. 2) and increased the variation range ofVGaround neutral pH (state 3 inScheme 1c). This suggests that the DA–MIP FET detects DA as the gate potential changes at the pH of biological fluids.Download:Download high-res image (159KB)Download:Download full-size imageFig. 2.Thresholdgate voltageshift (ΔVG) for DA–MIP-coated gateFETat 4 mA of IDobtained from ID-VGcurve with changes in pH from 5–12. Sigmoidal plots of DA–MIP-coated gateFETwere obtained without DA in each pH solution (triangle), and with 10 μM of DA (circle). Each approximated formula of sigmoidal plots was shown in the figure.

A thin layer of DA–MIP was successfully polymerized onto an Au electrode by SI-ATRP and characterized byelectrochemical methods. The DA–MIP-coated Au electrode was then employed as the gate electrode of an extended-gate FET, and its specificity and sensitivity to DA were examined.Fig. 3Aplots the ΔVoutvalues of the FET with the DA–MIP-coated gate at different concentrations of added catecholamines, and of the FET with the NIP-coated gate in the presence of DA. In the DA–MIP coated-gate FET, the ΔVoutdecreased in astepwise manneras the DA concentration increased from 40 nM to 20 μM. Time for the DA template removal affected the ΔVoutperformance. It was proved that the immersion in a 0.1-M HCl/MeOH solution for 3 days affected the sensitivity at a nanomolar level, although almost the entire template was removed after immersion for 18 h at a micromolar level (Fig. S5in the Supplementary information).Download:Download high-res image (346KB)Download:Download full-size imageFig. 3.(A) Change in gatesurface potential(Vout) of DA–MIP-coated gateFETwith different concentrations ofcatecholaminesat a constant ID(100 μA). Four types ofcatecholamines, DA (red line),LD(blue line),NE(orange line) and EP (green line), were added at each time indicated by arrows. The NIP-coated gateFETwas used as a control upon adding DA (black line). (B) Plots of shift in gate surface potential (ΔVout) at different concentrations of addedcatecholaminesbased on the data shown inA. Approximate curves were fitted by Langmuiradsorption isotherm. ΔVoutwere analyzed for the DA–MIP-coated gate FETs, where four types ofcatecholamines, DA (red), LD (blue),NE(orange) and EP (green), were added with different concentrations. The NIP-coated gate FET was used as a control upon adding DA (black). (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.).

Owing to the field effect, the negatively charged PBA–DA complexes formed by incorporating DA in the DA–MIP membrane affected the electron density at the source–drain channel in the MOSFET. Consequently, the gate surface potential decreased at constantISD. This result was supported by the semiconductor parameter analysis of the NIP- and DA–MIP-coated gate FETs in the presence of different DA concentrations (Fig. S6in the Supplementary information). As shown in theID–VGcurves, theVTincreased with increasing DA concentration in the DA–MIP-coated gate FET, but hardly changed in the NIP-coated gate FET. This result indicates that the gate surface potential of the DA–MIP FET responded to DA addition, and detected DA concentrations as low as 40 nM. Conversely, the ΔVoutvalues of the DA–MIP-coated gate FET were markedly lower after LD, NE, and EP addition than after DA addition. ΔVoutwas also lower in the NIP-coated gate FET after DA addition. Considering the EIS analysis and FET measurements of the DA–MIP and NIP FETs, we infer that the ATRP-based DA–MIP successfully imprinted the shape of DA at the interface of the Au electrode, enabling theelectrochemical detectionof the charge changes as DA binds to PBA.

The operation of an FET in the unsaturated region is generally described by(4)ID=μCOXWL[(VG−VT)VD−12VD2],whereIDis the drain current,μis theelectron mobilityin the channel,COXis thegate oxidecapacitance, andWLis the channel width-to-length ratio.VDandVGare the applied drain–source and gate–source voltages, respectively, andVTis the threshold voltage, given by (Sakata and Matsuse, 2017)(5)VT=Eref−ψ0+χsol−ϕsiq−Qit+Qf+QBCOX+2ϕf.

In Eq.(5),Erefis thereference electrodepotential relative to the vacuum potential,(−ψ0+χsol)describes the potential at the interface of the electrolyte and the Au gate electrode (here,χsolis the surfacedipole momentof the solution, which can be assumed constant),ϕsiqis thesiliconelectron work function,Qit,Qf, andQBare the charges per unit area of theinterface traps, the fixed oxides and the bulkdepletion layer, respectively, andϕfis the Fermipotential differencebetween the dopedbulk siliconand intrinsicsilicon.

Accounting for the capacitance and charge of the DA–MIP membrane on the Au gate electrode, Eq.(3)is modified as follows:(6)VT=Eref−ψ0+χsol−ϕsiq−Qit+Qf+QB+QMIPCCom+2ϕf,with(7)CCom=COX∙CMIPCOX+CMIP=COX1+COXCMIP.whereQMIPis the charge in the DA–MIP membrane andCComis the combined capacitance of the gateoxide(COX) and the DA–MIP membrane (CMIP) on the Au electrode. In this study,CMIPhardly changed after DA addition because the MIP hydrogel washydrophilic, meaning thatCComwas almost unchanged after DA adsorption. Moreover, the change in the interfacial potential (Δψ0) at the electrolyte/Au gate-electrode interface was constant because theionic concentration(i.e., the pH) was steadied by thebuffer solution. The quantitiesEref,ϕsiq,Qit,Qf,QB, andϕfshould also be unchanged bymolecular recognitionevents at the MIP interface. Thus, the signal response obtained by the FET sensor almost entirely reflects the change inVT(ΔVT), so we should evaluate ΔQMIPusing Eq.(6)with the above considerations.

The reversible interaction between DA and PBA in the MIP membrane is(8)DA+PBA↔DA∙PBA−.

The rate of formation of theDA∙PBA−complex at timetis written as(9)d[DA∙PBA−]dt=ka[DA][PBA]−kd[DA∙PBA−],wherekaandkdare the association and dissociation rate constants, respectively. At timet,[PBA]=[PBA]0−[DA∙PBA−], where[PBA]0is the concentration of PBA att= 0. Substituting this expression into Eq.(9)gives(10)d[DA∙PBA−]dt=ka[DA]([PBA]0−[DA∙PBA−])−kd[DA∙PBA−].

In this study, the chargeQMIPwas derived from Reaction (8), so is proportional to the formation of theDA∙PBA−complex in the DA–MIP membrane (Nishitani and Sakata, 2018). Meanwhile,Qmaxis proportional to the PBA concentration in the DA–MIP membrane, which indicates the capacity of the immobilized ligand. Therefore, Eq.(10)is modified to(11)dQMIPdt=ka[c](Qmax−Q)−kdQ=ka[c]Qmax−(ka[c]+kd),wheredQMIPdtis the rate of formation of the associated complex (DA∙PBA−) in the DA–MIP membrane (on the gate) and [c] is the concentration of the analyte (DA) in the solutions. Integrating Eq.(11), we obtain(12)QMIPt=ka[c]Qmax[1−e−((ka[c]+kd)t)]ka[c]+kd=[c]Qmax[c]+1/Ka[1−e−((Ka[c]+1)t)],whereKais thebinding constantof DA and PBA (ka/kd) in the DA–MIP membrane. From Eq.(12), we haveQMIPt=0= 0. Considering Eq.(6), the ΔVTafter a certain reaction timetis given by(13)∆VT(=−∆Vout)=−∆QMIPtCCom=−[c]∆Voutmax[c]+1Ka[1−e−((Ka[c]+1)t)]≈−[c]∆Voutmax[c]+1Ka,whereΔVoutmaxis the maximum change in surface potential induced by ΔQmax, which is proportional to the number ofbinding sites. In this study, ΔVoutat the gate was measured at constantIDassuming the source follower circuit inFig. 3A. Therefore, the detected ΔVoutwas regarded as the change inVGS, which equals –ΔVTat constantID.

Based on the above considerations, the electrical signal in the wholeFET circuitshould obey theLangmuir adsorptionmodel. AsΔVoutLwas determined based on ΔVoutafter 300 s each time DA was added,tin the Langmuir term can be set to a large value. Therefore, thesubstrate specificityof DA–MIP to each catecholamine was quantitatively evaluated by the equation of adsorption equilibrium.Fig. 3Bshows theΔVoutLversus concentration plots for each catecholamine from the data shown inFig. 3A. The parameters of the Langmuir fitting curve are given inTable 2. The dependence of output voltage on DA concentration clearly differs between DA–MIP and NIP with DA addition. The saturated amount of DA adsorption (recorded asΔVmaxL)andKawere 4.3 and 4.4 times higher, respectively, in the DA–MIP-coated gate FET than in the NIP-coated gate FET. In the DA–MIP-coated gate FET, theΔVmaxLwas clearly higher after DA addition than after LD addition, although thebinding constantof LD was twice that of DA. In LD, thecarboxyl groupin the vicinity of acatecholprovides many disester–PBAbinding sites, so theΔVmaxLappears to be higher for LD than for NE and EP (Friedman et al., 1974,Takahashi et al., 2008).Secor and Glass (2004)determined theKaof PBA in the presence of different catecholamines using a fluorescencechemosensor. In their study, theKawas 1.5 and 2 times higher for NE and EP than for DA, respectively, suggesting that the affinity of PBA to DA was lower than the other catecholamines. However, in the present study, the PBA in the DA–MIP-coated gate FET showed higher affinity to DA than to NE and EP. From thequantitative evaluationof the DA–MIP-coated gate FET, we concluded that a DA–MIP-coated gate FET can potentially select DA from a mixture of catecholamines.Table 2.Kinetic parameterscalculated from the approximate curves shown inFig. 3B, which were based on Langmuir model.Polymer-additive catecholamineKinetic parametersΔVmaxL(mV)Ka(105M−1)R2NIP_DA27.50.710.996DA–MIP_DA1193.110.995DA–MIP_LD63.67.750.986DA–MIP_NE51.51.260.974DA–MIP_EP38.84.330.981

To assess the sensitivity of the DA–MIP-coated gate FET to different catecholamines, we calculated the limit of detection (LOD) for each catecholamine in terms of the Kaiser limit (Kaiser, 1947). The LOD was calculated by regression analysis of the linear region, which maximizes the square of the correlation factor (R2) of the ΔVoutversus catecholamine concentration plot (Fig. S7in the Supplementary information). The estimated LODs of DA–MIP were 96 nM for DA, 150 nM for LD, 179 nM for NE, and 355 nM for EP. We compared these results with the reported values based on the electrochemical detection systems using MIP (Supplementary InformationTable S2). The DA–MIP-coated gate FET could measure the direct charge changes caused as a result of DA binding to PBA, which provided a comparable or even higher sensitivity than the sensitivities reported for theelectrochemical devices. Furthermore, thepotentiometricdetection in this study has an advantage of direct charge detection, which is derived from the binding of phenylboronic acid and catecholamines without influencing theMIP gelby applying voltage and without using any mediators. In previousHPLCandfluorescence spectroscopyanalyses, the dopamine concentrations were identified as sub-nM to 100 nM in plasma, saliva, and tears, and as μM-order in urine (Cuche et al., 1985,Cuche et al., 1986). The DA–MIP-coated gate FET in the present study has sufficient DA sensitivity to monitor urine, and nearly sufficient DA sensitivity to monitor other analytes. Therefore, the DA–MIP-coated gate FET can potentially measure DA in various body fluids with high sensitivity and specificity in the future. To evaluate the application of dopamine detection in biological samples, we monitored the gate surface potential changes in the NIP- and MIP-coated gate FETs in normal pooled human serum according to the procedure shown inFig. 3A. The sensitivity dropped in the nanomolar range, and the potential changed to be in gradual decline compared with that in PBS buffer, although the total potential shift after 20 μM DA addition was similar to that in the PBS buffer (Supplementary InformationFig. S8). This was probably because low-molecular-weight impurities (e.g., sugar and ascorbic acid) which were formed diester adducts with PBA were eliminated due to the size of DA-templated holes in theMIP gel, andprotein adsorptionto the electrode was inhibited due to thehydrophilic propertyof the MIP gel. Furthermore, an increase in theionic strengthlowered the sensitivity since a small amount of charge changes was effectively shielded by thecounterionsin the solution, as often discussed by theDebye length(Boo et al., 2004,Zimmermann et al., 2004). It is anticipated that the sensitivity can be improved by adding an additional layer on the MIP gel for suppressing ionicstrength, which is currently under consideration.

To quantify the DA accurately, a nano layer of DA–MIP was modified on a gate electrode by SI-ATRP while controlling its thickness. The DA–MIP-coated Au electrode was electrochemically characterized by capacitance, impedance, and FET measurements. The gate surface potential of the DA–MIP-coated gate FET clearly decreased when the added DA concentration exceeded 40 nM, and the responses to DA addition clearly differed from the responses to other catecholamines. The gate potential versus concentration relationships for each catecholamine were quantified by the Langmuiradsorption isotherm, suggesting that DA–MIP recognizes the side-chain functional group of the catecholamine and specifically captures DA. The binding phenomenon manifests as an electrical signal in the FET. To conclude, we proposed electrically direct detection of DA with high sensitivity andselectivityamong structural analogue of DA using the FET combined with DA-templated MIP. We will improve the sensitivity and specificity of DA–MIP FET by modification of the monomer construction and optimization of the MIP layer thickness for quantitative estimation in body fluids. The platform based on the MIP–FET biosensor is useful for a specific and highlysensitive detectionmethod of various biomarkers in the future.

This study was partly supported by the New Energy and Industrial Technology Development Organization (NEDO) under the Ministry of Economy Trade and Industry (METI) of Japan. Part of this work was conducted at the Advanced Characterization Nanotechnology Platform of the University of Tokyo, supported by the “Nanotechnology Platform” of the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology (MEXT), Japan. The authors wish to thank Assistant Professor K. Konishi of the University of Tokyo in Japan for his help in the ellipsometry experiment.

Download:Download Word document (9MB)Supplementary material

Ultrasensitive nonenzymatic electrochemical glucose sensor based on gold nanoparticles and molecularly imprinted polymers2020, Biosensors and BioelectronicsCitation Excerpt :Such a graphene oxide functionalized MIP sensor could provide an LOD of 20 nM. Kajisa et al. (2018b) synthesized a glucose imprinted hydrogel, containing vinylphenylboronic acid as functional monomer, on an electrode by radical copolymerization, which takes overnight. The templated glucose was subsequently removed with acidic alcohol solution and the hydrogel MIP coated electrode was used as gate in a field effect transistor (FET) sensor exhibiting an LOD of 3 μM.Show abstractA non-enzymatic electrochemical glucose sensor with high sensitivity and selectivity was developed using gold nanoparticles-decorated molecularly imprinted polymers (AuNP-MIPs). The AuNP-MIPs were synthesized on a gold surface by multistep amperometry using the optimized conditions and in-house synthesized gold nanoparticles in the presence of glucose as the template. The AuNP-MIPs were investigated by employing atomic force microscopy (AFM), scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and electrochemical techniques to confirm successful fabrication of the sensor. The electrochemical measurements for glucose binding on the AuNP-MIP sensor revealed a high affinity toward glucose with a dissociation constant (Kd) of 3 × 10−8M whereas the MIPs without AuNPs could not detect even the highest concentration of the investigation range (1.25 nM–2.56 μM). The comparative rebinding studies with AuNP-MIP and non-imprinted polymer (AuNP–NIP) exhibited an excellent selectivity toward glucose. The specificity of AuNP-MIP sensor was further investigated by studying with interfering compounds (sucrose, dopamine, starch, and bovine serum albumin), resulting in negligible cross-reactivity except for sucrose. The behavior of imprinted polymers in fluid solvents was also investigated by employing the AFM for the first time. The sensor could detect glucose in human serum with a detection limit of 1.25 nM and preserved its stability up to around 95% during a storage time of 40 days. Hence, such a sensor demonstrates a promising future for the detection of clinically relevant small molecules with its facile, cheap, and highly sensitive nature.Role of conducting polymer and metal oxide-based hybrids for applications in ampereometric sensors and biosensors2019, Microchemical JournalShow abstractIn recent years, the electrochemical sensors are used extensively due to their unique properties, especially in the biomedical research. Conducting polymers are well known for their inbuilt charge transfer properties and biocompatibility. Modification of conducting polymers using metal particles, metal oxides, and carbon materials enhance the sensitivity, stability, and reproducibility of the electrode which enhances the overall sensor performance. In this present review, we discuss recent achievements of electrochemical biosensors and sensor performance of various nanostructured conducting polymers and various metal oxides. Various synthesis methodologies of nanostructured conducting polymers and metal oxide-based hybrid sensors are also discussed. Analytical performance of nanohybrids of metal oxides incorporated with conducting polymers such as polyaniline, polypyrrole, polythiophene and their derivatives is elaborated. The characteristics of conducting polymer-based hybrids, metal oxide-based hybrids, and their application in biosensors are reviewed.Molecular Imprinted Poly(2,5-benzimidazole)-Modified VO<inf>2</inf>−CuWO<inf>4</inf> Homotype Heterojunction for Photoelectrochemical Dopamine Sensing2022, Analytical ChemistryRecent advances of conducting polymers and their composites forelectrochemical biosensing applications2020, Journal of Functional BiomaterialsEnhancement of Signal-to-Noise Ratio for Serotonin Detection with Well-Designed Nanofilter-Coated Potentiometric Electrochemical Biosensor2020, ACS Applied Materials and InterfacesBiologically Coupled Gate Field-Effect Transistors Meet in Vitro Diagnostics2019, ACS OmegaView all citing articles on Scopus

Ultrasensitive nonenzymatic electrochemical glucose sensor based on gold nanoparticles and molecularly imprinted polymers2020, Biosensors and BioelectronicsCitation Excerpt :Such a graphene oxide functionalized MIP sensor could provide an LOD of 20 nM. Kajisa et al. (2018b) synthesized a glucose imprinted hydrogel, containing vinylphenylboronic acid as functional monomer, on an electrode by radical copolymerization, which takes overnight. The templated glucose was subsequently removed with acidic alcohol solution and the hydrogel MIP coated electrode was used as gate in a field effect transistor (FET) sensor exhibiting an LOD of 3 μM.

Citation Excerpt :Such a graphene oxide functionalized MIP sensor could provide an LOD of 20 nM. Kajisa et al. (2018b) synthesized a glucose imprinted hydrogel, containing vinylphenylboronic acid as functional monomer, on an electrode by radical copolymerization, which takes overnight. The templated glucose was subsequently removed with acidic alcohol solution and the hydrogel MIP coated electrode was used as gate in a field effect transistor (FET) sensor exhibiting an LOD of 3 μM.

A non-enzymatic electrochemical glucose sensor with high sensitivity and selectivity was developed using gold nanoparticles-decorated molecularly imprinted polymers (AuNP-MIPs). The AuNP-MIPs were synthesized on a gold surface by multistep amperometry using the optimized conditions and in-house synthesized gold nanoparticles in the presence of glucose as the template. The AuNP-MIPs were investigated by employing atomic force microscopy (AFM), scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and electrochemical techniques to confirm successful fabrication of the sensor. The electrochemical measurements for glucose binding on the AuNP-MIP sensor revealed a high affinity toward glucose with a dissociation constant (Kd) of 3 × 10−8M whereas the MIPs without AuNPs could not detect even the highest concentration of the investigation range (1.25 nM–2.56 μM). The comparative rebinding studies with AuNP-MIP and non-imprinted polymer (AuNP–NIP) exhibited an excellent selectivity toward glucose. The specificity of AuNP-MIP sensor was further investigated by studying with interfering compounds (sucrose, dopamine, starch, and bovine serum albumin), resulting in negligible cross-reactivity except for sucrose. The behavior of imprinted polymers in fluid solvents was also investigated by employing the AFM for the first time. The sensor could detect glucose in human serum with a detection limit of 1.25 nM and preserved its stability up to around 95% during a storage time of 40 days. Hence, such a sensor demonstrates a promising future for the detection of clinically relevant small molecules with its facile, cheap, and highly sensitive nature.

Role of conducting polymer and metal oxide-based hybrids for applications in ampereometric sensors and biosensors2019, Microchemical Journal

In recent years, the electrochemical sensors are used extensively due to their unique properties, especially in the biomedical research. Conducting polymers are well known for their inbuilt charge transfer properties and biocompatibility. Modification of conducting polymers using metal particles, metal oxides, and carbon materials enhance the sensitivity, stability, and reproducibility of the electrode which enhances the overall sensor performance. In this present review, we discuss recent achievements of electrochemical biosensors and sensor performance of various nanostructured conducting polymers and various metal oxides. Various synthesis methodologies of nanostructured conducting polymers and metal oxide-based hybrid sensors are also discussed. Analytical performance of nanohybrids of metal oxides incorporated with conducting polymers such as polyaniline, polypyrrole, polythiophene and their derivatives is elaborated. The characteristics of conducting polymer-based hybrids, metal oxide-based hybrids, and their application in biosensors are reviewed.

Molecular Imprinted Poly(2,5-benzimidazole)-Modified VO<inf>2</inf>−CuWO<inf>4</inf> Homotype Heterojunction for Photoelectrochemical Dopamine Sensing2022, Analytical Chemistry

Recent advances of conducting polymers and their composites forelectrochemical biosensing applications2020, Journal of Functional Biomaterials

Enhancement of Signal-to-Noise Ratio for Serotonin Detection with Well-Designed Nanofilter-Coated Potentiometric Electrochemical Biosensor2020, ACS Applied Materials and Interfaces

Biologically Coupled Gate Field-Effect Transistors Meet in Vitro Diagnostics2019, ACS Omega

View details