Multiple type biosensors fabricated using the CMOS BioMEMS platform
Author links open overlay panel
Hann-Huei Tsai a
, 
Chen-Fu Lin a
, 
Ying-Zong Juang a
, 
I-Long Wang b
, 
Yu-Cheng Lin b
, 
Ruey-Lue Wang c
, 
Hung-Yin Lin d

Show more

Add to Mendeley

Share

Cite
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.snb.2009.01.061
Get rights and content
Full text access
Abstract
This paper reports a CMOS BioMEMS (biological micro-electromechanical system) platform for monolithically integrated multi-type biosensors and readout circuits. Gold is implemented in the current CMOS MEMS platform as an absorption layer for bio targets by wafer-level process tools. The characteristics of the gold and piezoresistive cantilever structures are analyzed. Two kinds of biosensors are fabricated and investigated in this work. The first one is an electro-microchip for immunoassay using platinum nano-particles and silver enhancement, and the detection time is over 10% shorter than the previous example made with a glass platform. The second biosensor is composed of the MIP (molecularly imprinted polymer) and ion-sensitive field-effect transistor (ISFET), and is used to detect creatinine. Moreover, the ring-oscillator-based readout circuit integrated with the ISFET is able to report the creatinine concentration. Two experimental cases demonstrate the possibility of integrating multiple type biosensors and readout circuits in micro or nano systems based on the CMOS BioMEMS platform.
Previous article in issue
Next article in issue
Keywords
CMOSBioMEMSGoldImmunoassayMIP-ISFET
1. Introduction
Biological and environmental monitors have received increased attention in recent years, and examples have been developed for use in enhancing life quality [1], [2], [3], [4], [5], [6], [7], [8], [9], [10], [11]. Minimization, integration and the capability to combine more mechanisms are the key points for a successful micro-sensing system. The CMOS (complementary metal oxide semiconductor) MEMS (micro-electromechanical system) platform has been shown to be one successful route for the integration of sensor and readout circuits on a single chip. In recent studies, acoustic devices, RF passive components, pressure sensors, thermal sensors, chemical sensors, gas sensors and sensors for detection of DNA hybridization have been successfully fabricated with the CMOS MEMS platform [4], [5], [6], [7], [8], [9], [10], [11]. Since biological signals are small, the quality of the signal is critical if it is to be successfully detected. With the single chip approach, the quantity of noise is reduced, and thus it is important to integrate the biosensor with the readout circuit. Based on the CMOS MEMS platform, it is possible to create some basic design guidelines and rules for sensor designers, who can then integrate the transducers or electrodes together with the readout circuits to realize a monolithic CMOS multiple type sensor micro-system.
Usually, bio detection is conducted in a liquid environment. Consequently, gold is selected for use in the CIC CMOS MEMS platform [12] since it is biocompatible and inactive in such conditions, and can thus be used as the working electrode in the electrochemical experiment. Moreover, the thiol-modified bio-molecules can bind to gold, and research has show that the gold–thiol (Au–S) bonds can be used to immobilize the DNA on one side of a cantilever [13], [14]. The CMOS BioMEMS process is successfully developed in this work, and the gold electrode that was tested in the electrochemical study showed comparable performance to the traditional working electrode. Two types of biosensors, an immunoassay study by impedance change and creatinine detection in an MIP (molecularly imprinted polymer) coated gate ion-sensitive field-effect transistor (ISFET), were successfully fabricated by this CMOS BioMEMS platform. The platform also integrated the readout circuit, and the experimental results show good reliability. Other metals (such as platinum, silver) and polymers or dielectrics can be easily implemented with this platform to produce multiple type biosensor microsystems.
2. CMOS BioMEMS process
The micromachining post process was developed by CIC based on the TSMC 0.35 μm 2P4M (2-poly 4-metal) process [11], [12]. In this work, a 3 KÅ gold layer with a 500 Å titanium adhesion layer were adopted into wafer-level post process. Since the passivation layer is composed of the oxide and nitride layers, the passivation layer of the sensing area is defined so that it can be etched off in foundry to simplify the post process. After this layer is removed, the inter metal layer oxide is the only dielectric material that still has to be etched off. The process stages are shown in Fig. 1, and are as follows: (1) passivation etching of the sensor area. (2) SA (sensor area) photography and etching in order to remove the oxide on top of the silicon under the PR (photo-resist), as well as it will etch off the oxide on top of the metal. (3) Gold deposition: using the lift-off process to deposit the gold on top of the metal or dielectric materials (oxide or nitride). Negative PR is used for the pattern definition in this process. (4) RLSS (release silicon) etch: to prevent gold damage, RLSS etching is processed by using PR. The depth of the silicon cavity is more than 25 μm, and it depends on the width of SA or the spacing between the metal lines. PR is not just used for the pattern definition, but it can also protect the readout circuit region during the aforementioned etching processes. Therefore, it can be reliably used to combine the multi-sensors and readout circuit on a single chip.

Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 1. The process stages of the gold layer implementation into the post process. (a) etch off passivation layer in the sensor area, (b) etch off the oxide layer, (c) gold deposition, (d) etch off the silicon to release the structures.

The gold layer could be on top of the different structures, as shown in Fig. 1(c), and this makes it more feasible to design sensors with different layers. The current minimum design rule for the gold layer is 5 μm. The adhesion of the gold on the oxide and metal has been checked experimentally, and Fig. 2 shows the 5 × 5 μm2 gold islands fabricated to confirm their robustness. Furthermore, the surface of gold layer is important as it is the site where the biological materials will be absorbed, and SEM observations confirm that there is no PR residue or other particles on it. In addition, different cantilever structures with lengths of 100 μm to 500 μm and a width of 30 μm are fabricated by using this process, and these are shown in Fig. 3. In addition, stick, triangle, and M-type cantilevers are also fabricated. The structure of the cantilever is gold/metal 2/IMD (inter metal oxide)/metal 1/ILD (inter layer dielectric)/poly/oxide. The piezoresistivity of n-type doped poly is characterized by putting the M-type cantilever with a length of 500 μm and width of 30 μm into the wind tunnel. Fig. 4 shows that the output voltage (constant current applied) is proportional to the flow rate. The cross-section of the cantilever is analyzed by focused ion beam (FIB) analysis to verify the structure, and Fig. 5 shows that the gold layer is on top of the metal 2 layer, while the. platinum layer is coated on top of the gold layer before FIB analysis.

Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 2. Gold islands fabricated by post-processing. The resolution and adhesion of the gold islands are good. Each area of the gold island is 5 × 5 μm2 (a) gold on the oxide and (b) gold on the AlCu.


Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 3. Different cantilevers fabricated by the CMOS BioMEMS process.


Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 4. The plot of readout voltage versus flow rate.


Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 5. Gold layer on the top of the cantilever.

3. Biosensor results
After developing the CMOS BioMEMS process, different types of biosensors could be designed based on this platform where the electrode type biosensors detect the impedance, current, or potential change. In addition, the cantilever type biosensor and ISFET could also be realized by this platform. Specifically, two biosensors are investigated in this study; one is an electro-microchip for immunoassay using platinum nano-particles and silver enhancement, and the other one is an MIP gate ISFET, and these two systems will be discussed in the following sections.
3.1. An electro-microchip for immunoassay using platinum nano-particles and silver enhancement
Immunoassays are based on the specific reaction of antibodies with the target substances (antigens) to be detected, and the technique has been widely used for detecting low concentrations of such materials in clinical biofluid specimens, such as urine and blood. In addition, it can also detect trace amounts of drugs and chemicals such as pesticides in biological and environmental samples. According to the nature of the label used, immunoassay can be classified as label-free immunoassay, radioimmunoassay [15], fluorescent immunoassay [16], chemiluminescence immunoassay [17], enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA), bioluminescent immunoassay, and so on. The most commonly used format of immunoassays is ELISA, which is a powerful and effective method for estimating antibody–antigen recognition. However, every immunoassay method has the disadvantage that the detection instruments required are very expensive, although some work has been done to decrease the cost, increase the sensitivity, and shorten the reaction time of such techniques [18], [19].
In this case, a 4 μm PtNPs (platinum nano-particles) are used as the label, and the immunogold silver staining (IGSS) technique [20] is used to amplify the signal. This study is based on a sandwich immunoassay (three-layer format), containing a primary antibody, a secondary antibody and test antigens (Fig. 6). IgG (Immunoglobulin G) and protein A are used as the antibody and antigen in this experiment, respectively. The antibody labeled with PtNPs will bind with the antigen on the electro-microchip. The silver enhancement solution is used to decrease the detection time on the impedance detection, which could be detected by the two electrodes.

Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 6. Schematic diagram of the signal amplification method. The conventional ELISA (enzyme-link immunosorbent assay) process is used to coat antibodies and antigens on the electro-, and the silver enhancement solution is used to amplify the signal. The PtNPs labeled with antibody acts as catalysts to reduce silver ions to metallic silver.

In a previous work, the two parallel electrodes were fabricated on the glass substrate with a gap size of 20–200 μm [21]. The minimum detection time is around 15 min with the 20 μm electrode gap size, and it may be possible to reduce the detection time if the electrode gap could be shrunk. By using the CMOS BioMEMS platform, the gold electrode gap is shrunk to 5, 10, and 15 μm. In addition, two lengths of electrode are available: 100 and 150 μm, and the impedance is measured as 0.5 V and 100 Hz with a HIOKI 3532 LCR meter. Test antigen (protein A) and anti-protein A IgG are selected to examine the feasibility and performance of the electro-microchip, with non-specific antigen BSA (bovine serum albumin) used as the control. The procedures are based on the conventional ELISA procedures.
This section also investigates the relationship between the gap size and electrode length. The electrodes with gap size 5–15 μm were fabricated using the CMOS BioMEMS platform, while an electrode with a gap size of 20 μm was produced using the original glass platform [21]. The concentration of antigen was fixed at 1 ng/ml. The data for the different electrodes was detected by running the same experiment five times, and the sensitivity was shown to be influenced by different gap sizes and electrode lengths. The detection time decreases along with the electrode gap, as shown in Fig. 7. The impedance is very high at the initial stage due to lower silver enhancement effect. The sensor with a 5 μm electrode gap gets the fastest detection time of 12 min. At a 16 min detection time, these four different electrode gap electro-microchips all have different impedances, with a higher impedance observed in electro-microchips with a larger electrode gap. The electrode gap has a stronger influence on sensitivity than the electrode length, as shown in Fig. 7. Although smaller impedance will be obtained when the gap length is increased by 50 μm, from 100 to 150 μm, the detection time is not changed with electrodes that have the same gap. Therefore, the electrode gap is the key factor in obtaining a shorter detection time.

Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 7. The impedance spectrum of a chip with parallel electrodes with 5–20 μm gap size in the sandwich immunoassay.

3.2. MIP-gate ISFET for creatinine detection
Molecular imprinting polymers (MIP) have attracted much research interest for applications in sensing systems due to their high selectivity and stability [22], [23], [24]. Previously, surface microcontact imprinting of creatinine on poly(ethylene-co-vinyl alcohol), or EVAL, was investigated for the recognition of creatinine, and it was found that the binding capacity of creatinine-imprinted polymers is 55.0 mg/cm2 [25]. In brief, the synthesis of creatinine-imprinted EVAL thin film has three steps: (1) casting the EVAL solution (EVAL/DMSO (dimethyl sulfoxide) = 1 wt%) and creatinine on the ISFET; (2) solvent evaporation in an oven at 60 °C; and finally (3) removal of the template molecules by rinsing three times with 5 mL of ethanol for 1 h and deionized water for 10 mins [25]. All membranes were set to equilibrium with PBS (phosphate buffered saline) overnight before being used.
An extended-gate ion-sensitive field-effect transistor (ISFET) [26], [27] for detecting creatinine has been presented in the literature [28]. Traditionally, a sensing polymer membrane is grown to substitute the gate oxide of a metal-oxide-semiconductor field-effect transistor (MOSFET), or is grown onto an extended electrode connected to the MOS gate. The latter is also called an extended-gate ion-sensitive field-effect transistor, and its sensitivity depends on the thickness of the membrane coating. In this second case, extended-gate ISFETs were fabricated by using the CMOS BioMEMS platform. The top metal layer is used to form an extended electrode and the MOSFET transducer is underneath it. The areas of the extended electrode and the MOS gate are 500 × 500 μm2 and 10,000 × 1 μm2, respectively. The latter is composed of 100 fingers of 100 × 1 μm2 MOS gates and is located below the extended electrode. Large transconductance of a MOSFET with a large gate width is helpful for the subsequent signal processing. Large transistor size results in larger MOS capacitance and hence the capacitance of the membrane on the extended electrode must be much larger to ensure that the channel carriers of the MOSFET can be induced and suitable sensing sensitivity guaranteed.
Enzymes are the most commonly used sensing membranes, although they have the drawback of being relatively expensive. Consequently, this research uses molecularly imprinted polymers as the sensing membrane, as they are both relatively cheap and can be reused. For the ISFETs presented in this work, the membrane thickness must be less than 1 μm so that the they can conduct well. We have successfully imprinted such a thin polymer membrane on an extended electrode, and an external Ag/AgCl electrode is used as the reference electrode for the ISFET's detection operation.
After the MIP EVAL thin film is coated on the 500 × 500 μm2 sensing-gate (metal 4) of MOSFET, the integrated active device is a 3.3 V NMOS in the P-well. Metal 4 was connected to the gate poly via multi metal layers, and the structure is shown in Fig. 8. For electrochemical measurements, the chip was bonded on PCB. PDMS (polydimethyl siloxane) was coated around the chip, except for the sensing area, to protect the bond wire and exposed metal from hydrolyzing or being attacked by ions. The Ag/AgCl reference electrode was put into the solution and kept the gate surface potential stable when the Vgs was applied. The creatinine concentrations in the experiment ranged from 0.2 to 1.3 mg/mL, and each concentration was measured for 20 min. A 1.8 V bias voltage was applied between the Ag/AgCl reference electrode and the source of ISFET, and VDS was also set at 1.8 V. The drain current versus VDS at different creatinine concentrations is shown in Fig. 9, revealing that the response current ID is reduced at high levels of creatinine in the saturation region. A ring oscillator was integrated with the MIP-gate ISFET to readout the electrical signal. The oscillation frequencies were found to be 30.54 and 26.18 MHz for creatinine concentrations of 0.4 and 1.2 mg/mL, respectively.

Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 8. Structure of MIP-gate ISFET.


Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 9. The plot of saturation current versus creatinine concentration at VDS = 1.8 V.

4. Conclusion
A CMOS BioMEMS platform with a gold layer was successfully developed in this paper, with the qualities of the layer verified by adhesion check, SEM, and FIB cut. Two biosensors were fabricated by using this platform. The first combined electro-microchip, platinum nano-particles, and silver enhancement techniques to detect the antigen, protein A. The results show that the detection time could be reduced after shrinking the electrode gap by using this platform, and it is worth noting that the influence of electrode length on the detection time was less than that of the electrode gap. The other sensor was an MIP-gate ISFET to detect creatinine, and with this unit the drain saturation current was reduced as the creatinine concentration increased. In addition, a full digital readout circuit was integrated with the MIP-gate ISFET to report the creatinine concentration, and other environmental and biological sensors could be integrated with the readout circuits with this new platform in order to realize multiple type sensor micro-systems.
