Control of Potential Response to Small Biomolecules with Electrochemically Grafted Aryl-Based Monolayer in Field-Effect Transistor-Based Sensors
Shogo HimoriShoichi NishitaniToshiya Sakata*
Open PDF
Supporting Information (1)
OpenURL UNIV OF CHICAGO
Abstract

In this paper, we demonstrate the use of a monolayer film electrografted via diazonium chemistry for controlling the potential response of a field-effect transistor (FET)-based sensor. 4-Nitrobenzenediazonium salt is electrografted on an extended-Au-gate FET (EG-Au-FET) with or without using a radical scavenger by cyclic voltammetry (CV), resulting in the formation of a monolayer or multilayer. In particular, the surface coverage of the aryl-derivative monolayer on the Au gate electrode gradually increases with increasing number of potential cycles in CV. Here, Au exhibits a strong catalytic action, resulting in the oxidation of organic compounds. Uric acid is used as a low-molecular-weight biomolecule for interference. The denser the surface coverage of the grafted monolayer, the smaller the potential response of the EG-Au-FET because the redox reaction of uric acid with the Au gate surface is suppressed. On the other hand, the effect of the aryl-derivative multilayer on the suppression of the potential response was smaller than that of the monolayer because the electrogenerated aryl radicals did not react with the Au surface but with the grafted species, resulting in an exposed part of the Au surface among the grafted aryl molecules. Thus, a platform based on such a monolayer film electrografted via diazonium chemistry is suitable for controlling the potential response based on the interference of low-molecular-weight biomolecules in biosamples.

This publication is licensed under the terms of your institutional subscription. Request reuse permissions.

Copyright © 2019 American Chemical Society
Subjects
what are subjects
Electrodes
Gold
Granular materials
Monolayers
Thin films
Introduction
In the field of bio/chemical sensor technology, solution gate field-effect transistors (FETs) have attracted global attention. Because an ion-sensitive solid-state device was proposed for neurophysiological measurements, (1) ion-sensitive FETs have been often developed as the common structure of ion sensors (1,2) and potentiometric bio/chemical sensors, (3−9) with diverse semiconducting materials used as the channel, including both inorganic and organic materials. (10−15) Oxide membranes (SiO2, Ta2O5, etc.) are commonly used as the gate insulator because of their pH sensitivity on the basis of the equilibrium reaction between hydrogen ions and hydroxy groups at the oxide gate. (16,17) In addition, ion-sensitive membranes or probe biomolecules are immobilized on the gate surface of the FET to specifically and selectively detect ions or biomolecules, which are targeted in a sample solution. (4,6) On the other hand, an Au thin film is utilized as the gate electrode of an extended-Au-gate FET (EG-Au-FET), in which the gate electrode is extended from the metal gate of the FET (Figure 1) because probes with thiol groups are easily modified by −S–Au binding on the Au gate surface. (18−21) However, Au shows a strong catalytic action, unless modified, which results in the oxidation of organic compounds, even low-molecular-weight biomolecules such as uric acid. (22−24) In particular, the Au surface is well-known to be oxidized upon exposure to ultraviolet (UV)/ozone; (25−27) that is, the oxidized Au surface is easily reduced by the surface redox reaction with small biomolecules (Figure 1). This is why an electromotive force is induced at an Au film in accordance with the Nernstian equation. (28) This means that an Au electrode is very useful for the highly sensitive detection of small biomolecules but without detection selectivity (Figure S1, Supporting Information). When the Au electrode surface is chemically modified, so that only a small target biomolecule reaches and directly interacts with the Au electrode, it can be specifically detected on the Au electrode.
Figure 1

Figure 1. (a) Conceptual illustration of EG-Au-FET sensor. The surface redox reaction between small biomolecules and the Au surface is detected as the change in the surface potential of FET. (b) Aryl-derivative monolayer or multilayer electrografted on the Au electrode.

In this case, a self-assembled monolayer (SAM) with thiol groups is often utilized to functionalize an Au electrode surface, as mentioned in the above paragraph. (18−21) However, thiol-derivative SAMs are formed on noble metals such as Au but not on other materials. Also, −S–Au bond cleavage occurs under UV irradiation. (29,30) On the other hand, a method of electrografting molecules to substrates such as carbon and Au films via diazonium chemistry has been reported. (31−37) An aryl diazonium salt can form strong bonds with substrates through the electroreduction of azo groups. Such an aryl-derivative film usually forms a multilayer with a random structure by a radical reaction. In recent studies, aryl-derivative monolayers were densely electrografted on carbon using a radical scavenger. (31) In addition, in the electrografting method, the electrochemically assisted procedure offers a simple and efficient means of covalently modifying a thin film on conductive electrodes, such as carbon and Au, with only basic electrochemical equipment. (38,39) Therefore, such an aryl-derivative monolayer electrografted on a gate electrode may be effective for controlling the potential responses of FET sensors.
In this paper, we investigate the effect of an aryl-derivative monolayer, which is electrografted on an Au gate electrode with a radical scavenger, on the potential response based on the redox reaction of small biomolecules with the Au surface on an FET sensor (Figure 1). In particular, the surface coverage of the aryl-derivative film on the Au electrode is controlled by varying the number of voltage cycles in cyclic voltammetry (CV). As a model of small biomolecules, uric acid is used to examine the potential response of the EG-Au-FET, based on its redox reaction with the Au surface because it is one of the biomolecules causing interference in the biosamples, that is, the potential response of the FET sensor, with such a low-molecular-weight molecule causing interference, should be suppressed to specifically and sensitively detect target molecules. An aryl-derivative multilayer, which is electrografted without a radical scavenger, is coated on the Au gate electrode for comparison with the potential response of the monolayer-grafted EG-Au-FET (Figure 1).
Experimental Section
Chemicals
The following chemicals were used in this study. 4-Nitrobenzenediazonium tetrafluoroborate (NBD) and 2,2-diphenyl-1-picrylhydrazyl (DPPH) were purchased from Tokyo Chemical Industry Co., Ltd. Tetrabutylammonium hexafluorophosphate (nBuPF6), acetonitrile, uric acid, NaCl, KCl, agarose, acetone, methanol, and ethanol were purchased from Wako Pure Chemicals Industries, Ltd. Phosphate-buffered saline (PBS, pH 7.4) was purchased from Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.
Electrochemical Grafting via Diazonium Chemistry
A potentiostat/galvanostat (PS-14, Toho Technical Research) and a function generator (AFG3102C, Tektronix) were used for the electrochemical grafting via diazonium chemistry. The Ag/AgCl electrode was immersed in saturated KCl solution. Prior to surface modification, a polycarbonate ring (18 mm inner diameter/20 mm outer diameter) was encapsulated on an Au gate electrode using an epoxy resin (Pelnox ZC-203T), excluding the sensing surface. The Au electrode was cleaned by 10 min sonication in acetone, 10 min sonication in methanol, and 5 min sonication in distilled water. Then, the Au electrode was modified in acetonitrile + 1 mM NBD + 25 mM nBuPF6 solutions by CV in the potential range of +0.3 to −0.7 V at a scan rate of 50 mV/s to graft the multilayer. The monolayer was grafted in a solution of acetonitrile + 1 mM NBD + 25 mM nBuPF6 + 2 mM DPPH. After the CV cycles, the substrate was washed with methanol and then with distilled water in every experiment. The thickness of the aryl-derivative films electrografted on the Au substrate was evaluated by laser microscopy (VK-X1100, KEYENCE). The surface properties of aryl-derivative films obtained by the CV method were evaluated by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) and atomic force microscopy (AFM).
Reduction of Aryl-Derivative Film
The reduction of nitro groups to amino groups was conducted by CV in water/ethanol solutions (90/10%) containing 0.1 M KCl. The potential was varied from −1.0 to 0.2 V. The scan rate was 50 mV/s. An Ag/AgCl electrode was used as the reference electrode.
Impedance Measurement
The impedance was measured using an electrochemical analyzer (618E, BAS Instruments) over a wide range of frequencies (10 mHz to 10 kHz). The measurement medium was PBS (pH 7.4) containing 1 mM potassium ferricyanide/potassium ferrocyanide as redox mediators. The reference and counter electrodes were an Ag/AgCl electrode and a platinum electrode, respectively.
Measurement Using FET Device
A modified or unmodified Au electrode was connected to the extended gate of a silicon-based n-channel junction-type FET (K246-Y9A, Toshiba), and a gate voltage (VG) was applied through the Ag/AgCl reference electrode. In particular, the gate surface potential (Vout) was measured in real time using an FET real-time monitoring system (PROVIGATE Inc.). In this study, the change in Vout (ΔVout) at the gate was monitored for all measurements using a source follower circuit, where VG, drain voltage (VD), and drain-source current (IDS) were set to constant values (Figure S2, Supporting Information). Thus, ΔVout is a measure of the change in the surface potential or threshold voltage. In the measurement, the sensing surface was covered with 1.5 mL of PBS. ΔVout was monitored by applying IDS = 700 μA and VG = 0 V. After the surface potential stabilized, uric acid was gradually titrated to a final concentration in the range of 5 μM to 1 mM. To suppress the spike signals in the gate surface potential induced by sample addition, the introduced volume was 1/100 of the total volume of the measurement solution.
Results and Discussion
Electrografting of NBD Salt via Diazonium Chemistry on the Au Electrode
A diazonium-derived interface was formed to control the surface redox reaction of small biomolecules with the Au electrode by electrografting the NBD salt via diazonium chemistry. The NBD salt was electrografted by CV with or without DPPH, resulting in the formation of a monolayer or multilayer interface on the Au electrode. The addition of an appropriate amount of a radical scavenger prevented the grafted species from attack by electrogenerated aryl radicals, without interfering with the direct grafting process. (31) Thus, DPPH was used as the radical scavenger to graft the aryl-derivative monolayer on the Au electrode but not its multilayer.
On the basis of previous data, (31) in the case of the formation of an aryl-derivative multilayer by electrografting without DPPH, a reduction peak (approximately −0.3 V) appeared in the first cycle, but the peak did not appear from the second cycle (Figure 2a). This is because the grafted film on the Au electrode became insulative in the early stage of electrografting. The shape of the cyclic voltammogram hardly changed after the second cycle, that is, the electrogenerated aryl radicals did not react with the Au surface but with the grafted species. Therefore, the aryl-derivative multilayer was roughly grafted on the Au electrode in the first cycle. On the other hand, the electrografting of the NBD salt to the Au electrode with DPPH resulted in different cyclic voltammograms. No significant change in current induced by a potential sweep was found between the first and second cycles (Figure 2b). However, the current gradually decreased in the swept voltage range, that is, the electrografted surface became insulative with increasing number of swept cycles. This is because the radical reaction between the electrogenerated aryl radicals and the grafted species was suppressed by DPPH, which means that no multilayer was formed. In the case of monolayer formation, the reactivity of the aryl radical was reduced by the radical scavenger DPPH; therefore, the formation speed of the monolayer was assumed to be lower than that of the multilayer. As a result, the current at the first cycle for electrografting with DPPH (Figure 2b) exhibited lower insulation than that without DPPH (Figure 2a).
Figure 2

Figure 2. (a) Cyclic voltammogram of Au electrode in 1 mM NBD + 25 mM nBuPF6 at 50 mV/s for multilayer modification. (b) Cyclic voltammogram of Au electrode in 1 mM NBD + 25 mM nBuPF6 + 2 mM DPPH at 50 mV/s for monolayer modification.

Evaluation of Au Surface with Aryl Film Electrografted via Diazonium Chemistry
Controlling the thickness and coverage of the electrografted aryl film is important to control the surface redox reaction of small biomolecules with the Au surface. In this case, such parameters were evaluated by varying the number of CV cycles used for electrografting with or without DPPH. Figure S3 (Supporting Information) shows the thickness of the electrografted aryl film on the Au electrode obtained using a laser microscope. As shown in Figure S3a,b (Supporting Information), the thickness of the electrografted aryl film in DPPH-free grafting increased from 10 to 72 nm when the number of cycles was increased from 5 to 30, which resulted in the formation of a multilayer. On the other hand, no electrografted aryl film was detected in the modification with DPPH, even when 100 cycles were performed, as shown in Figure S3c (Supporting Information). This indicates that the monolayer was too thin to be detected. In a previous paper, it was reported that the thickness of a diazonium monolayer was only 0.8 nm, compared with the ideal resolution of a laser microscope of 0.5 nm. (34) In this study, the formation of an aryl-derivative monolayer was also confirmed from the results of electrical measurement using the aryl film-coated Au-gate FET, as reported in the next section. Moreover, the surface roughness was examined for the unmodified Au, the aryl-derivative-monolayer-grafted Au (50 cycles with DPPH), and the aryl-derivative-multilayer-grafted Au (30 cycles without DPPH) by AFM. As shown in Figure 3, the effect of electrografting with or without DPPH on the surface roughness was clearly found by comparison with that for the unmodified Au. The surface roughness (Rq) of the unmodified Au and the monolayer-grafted Au was in the range from 1 to 2 nm, whereas that of multilayer-grafted Au was about 6.5 nm. In particular, the surface morphology of the monolayer-grafted Au showed smaller irregularities owing to the electrografting with DPPH than that of unmodified Au. Furthermore, the electrografting without DPPH contributed to the formation of a multilayer on the Au surface. Thus, the significant effect of DPPH on electrografting was observed by AFM.
Figure 3

Figure 3. AFM images of surface roughness of the (a) unmodified Au, (b) aryl-derivative-monolayer-grafted Au (50 cycles with DPPH), and (c) aryl-derivative-multilayer-grafted Au (30 cycles without DPPH).

Table 1 shows the elemental composition of the prepared substrates, evaluated by XPS (Figure S4, Supporting Information). After electrografting the aryl-derivative monolayer or multilayer by CV with DPPH (50 cycles) or without DPPH (30 cycles), hardly any Au, which originates from the electrode, was found, whereas the compositions of nitrogen and oxygen increased on the Au surface. Thus, the aryl-derivative films were successfully grafted on the Au substrates by the CV procedure. In particular, the compositions of nitrogen and oxygen for the multilayer were higher than those for the monolayer.
Table 1. Elemental Analyses by XPS
 	atom (%)
sample	Au	C	N	O
Au	24.3	65.0	0.3	10.5
monolayer	3.6	77.1	5.7	13.6
multilayer	0.2	69.2	9.8	20.7
To examine the surface coverage of the aryl film electrografted by diazonium chemistry, the reduction of nitro groups in aryl films electrografted for 30 cycles (multilayer) and 50 cycles (monolayer) was conducted by the CV method, that is, nitrobenzene was reduced to aniline. The reaction mechanism is expressed by
	(1)
	(2)
As shown in Figure S5 (Supporting Information), the reduction peak current at −0.8 V was based on reaction 1. On the other hand, the oxidation peak current at approximately −0.3 V was caused by reaction 2, which decreased as the number of potential cycles increased, with almost no current appearing after five cycles. The surface coverage was calculated from the redox reaction resulting in the transfer of six electrons in eq 1, assuming that the effect of eq 2 was almost negligible. The surface coverage is expressed by
	(3)
Q1 is the difference between the total current in the NBD-grafted substrate and that in the nongrafted substrate for five cycles. Q2 is the sum of the difference between the total oxidation peak current at around −0.3 V (approximately −0.35 to −0.10) in each cycle (first to fourth) and that in the fifth cycle in the NBD-grafted substrate. n is the number of electrons involved in the reaction (n = 6 here). F is the Faraday constant, and A is the area of the substrate coated by the NBD salt. Using eq 3 and the data shown in Figure S5 (Supporting Information), the surface coverage on the Au electrode was calculated for the aryl-derivative multilayer and the aryl-derivative monolayer. For the aryl-derivative multilayer (Figure S5a,b, Supporting Information), the coverage densities were 3.48 × 10–9 mol/cm2 for the substrate electrografted for 5 cycles and 4.76 × 10–9 mol/cm2 for the substrate electrografted for 30 cycles (Table 2). Thus, the surface coverage hardly changed even when the number of CV cycles employed for electrografting was increased. In this case, the reduced nitro groups were randomly arranged in the thickness direction, which resulted from the formation of the multilayer. Accordingly, the surface coverage of the multilayer must be estimated by considering its thickness. The surface coverage per layer was calculated using the following equation
	(4)
Here, Γ is the surface coverage and d is the thickness. Γmulti and d were measured in this study (Figure S3, Supporting Information and Table 2), whereas dmono was obtained from a previous paper (dmono = 0.8 nm). (34) As a result, the surface coverages on the Au electrode for 5 and 30 cycles were modified to 2.78 × 10–10 and 5.29 × 10–11 mol/cm2, respectively, which were the surface coverages for the monolayer calculated from those for the multilayer. Moreover, the surface coverage for the aryl-derivative monolayer electrografted for 50 cycles was calculated as 1.42 × 10–9 mol/cm2 on the basis of data in Figure S5d (Supporting Information), which was derived from eq 3. The monolayer was too thin for its thickness to be measured using a laser microscope even after electrografting for 100 cycles, but the surface coverage for the monolayer was significantly higher than that for the multilayer, which was modified as a single layer, that is, some spaces were expected between grafted aryl molecules on the Au electrode in the multilayer, whereas the aryl molecules were expected to be densely tethered without such spaces in the monolayer. Therefore, the potential response of the FET sensor in the surface redox reaction of small biomolecules can be controlled by changing the number of CV cycles used to form the monolayer. However, the density (1.42 × 10–9 mol/cm2) for the aryl-derivative monolayer electrografted for 50 cycles was higher than that (approximately 7 × 10–10 mol/cm2) for the alkanethiol SAMs on Au(111) obtained in a previous work. (40) Thus, a multilayer may have been partially formed on the Au gate even for the electrografting with DPPH, which means that the surface was not exactly monolayered, although it was clear that the substrate was densely covered with the aryl-derivative film.
Table 2. Surface Coverage and Thickness of Aryl-Derivative Multilayer Film on Au Substrate Obtained by Electrografting for 5 and 30 Potential Cycles
 	5 potential cycles	30 potential cycles
Γmulti	3.48 × 10–9 mol/cm2	4.76 × 10–9 mol/cm2
d	10 nm	72 nm
Γmono	2.78 × 10–10 mol/cm2	5.29 × 10–11 mol/cm2
Control of Potential Response Using FET Sensor via Diazonium Chemistry
Considering the results in the previous section, the surface coverage on the Au electrode can be controlled by changing the number of CV cycles used to electrograft the NBD salt with DPPH. Here, the potential response of the surface redox reaction of uric acid as a small impurity was investigated using the EG-Au-FET, where the aryl-derivative monolayer was coated, with the number of CV cycles varied from 15 to 70 (Figure 4a). In Figure 4, the current at −0.7 V (I–0.7) in the cyclic voltammogram shown in Figure 4a was focused on to evaluate the insulation of the electrografted monolayer film. As the insulation of the film decreased, the absolute value of I–0.7 increased, as indicated by graphs A–E. Figure 4b shows the change in the surface potential of the monolayer-coated Au-gate FET with the change in the concentration of uric acid from 5 μM to 1 mM. The unmodified Au gate was used as the control sensor. The potential response of FETs via uric acid was clearly suppressed with increasing number of CV cycles performed for electrografting, that is, with increasing packing density of the aryl-derivative monolayer on the Au surface (Figure 5a). In particular, the potential response of the Au electrode with the most insulative film by adding 1 mM uric acid was reduced to less than 1/10 of that with the unmodified Au electrode and was completely eliminated after adding less than 100 μM uric acid. Here, the rate of suppression of the potential response by the monolayer (S) is defined as S = 1 – Vmono/Vnon, where Vmono indicates the potential response of the FET with the monolayer-coated Au electrode and Vnon indicates the potential response of that with the unmodified Au electrode. As shown in Figure 4c, S increased on decreasing the absolute value of I–0.7. This means that the higher the density of the monolayer resulting in higher insulation of the monolayer film, the higher the value of S. That is, the potential response of the FET sensor, which depends on the redox reaction of small biomolecules with the exposed part of the Au surface among the grafted aryl molecules, can be controlled by the surface coverage (Figure 5a). In addition, the aryl-derivative multilayer films obtained by electrografting for 5 and 40 cycles without DPPH were prepared on the Au electrodes of extended-gate FETs. Figure 6 shows the change in the surface potential of the multilayer-grafted Au-gate FET upon adding uric acid in the concentration range of 5 μM to 1 mM. The potential response of the EG-Au-FET with the multilayer was not sufficiently suppressed or controlled even when the number of CV cycles was increased. This means that the exposed part of the Au surface among the grafted aryl molecules remained because the electrogenerated aryl radicals would have attacked grafted species rather than been directly grafted to the Au surface (Figure 5b). Therefore, the effect of the aryl-derivative multilayer on the prevention of the uric acid/Au interaction hardly changed even when the number of CV cycles increased. Thus, the surface redox reaction of small molecules such as uric acid with the Au surface can be prevented by the densely packed aryl-derivative monolayer electrografted using the radical scavenger by CV, although sufficient suppression may not occur for the aryl-derivative multilayer electrografted without the radical scavenger, depending on the electrical characteristics of the aryl-derivative film-coated EG-Au-FET sensor.
Figure 4

Figure 4. (a) Cyclic voltammogram of Au electrode in 1 mM NBD + 25 mM nBuPF6 + 2 mM DPPH at 50 mV/s for monolayer modification with 15–70 cycles. As the insulation of the film decreased, the absolute value of I–0.7 increased in the order of graphs A, B, C, D, and E. (b) Change in the surface potential of aryl-derivative-monolayer-grafted and nongrafted Au-gate FET sensors upon adding uric acid in the concentration range of 5 μM to 1 mM. (c) Rate of suppression of potential response by the monolayer (S) for current at −0.7 V (I–0.7) in the cyclic voltammogram shown in (a). S was estimated from the change in the surface potential of the FET upon adding 1 mM uric acid.

Figure 5

Figure 5. Formation process of aryl-derivative films on Au electrode electrografted by CV for multilayer (a) and monolayer (b).

Figure 6

Figure 6. Change in the surface potential of aryl-derivative-multilayer-grafted and nongrafted Au-gate FET sensors upon adding uric acid in the concentration range of 5 μM to 1 mM. Aryl-derivative multilayer films were obtained by electrografting for 5 and 40 cycles by CV. (a) Real-time measurement. (b) Change in the surface potential for the concentration of uric acid based on (a).

The effect of the aryl-derivative film on the interaction of the redox mediator with the Au electrode was also confirmed by electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS), as shown in Figure 7. The aryl-derivative monolayer was electrografted with DPPH for 30 cycles, whereas the aryl-derivative multilayer was electrografted without DPPH for 30 cycles. According to the modulus of impedance for the aryl-monolayer- and aryl-multilayer-grafted Au electrodes, which increases with increasing frequency at lower frequencies (below Hz order), the redox reaction of the mediator proceeded at the Au electrode, and the impedance for the aryl-monolayer-grafted Au electrode was higher than that for the aryl-multilayer-grafted Au electrode, as shown in Figure 7a (the dotted area is enlarged). Figure 7b (the dotted area is enlarged) shows Nyquist plots for the aryl-monolayer-grafted and aryl-multilayer-grafted Au electrodes, which resolve the impedance into real and imaginary parts, in the frequency range from 10 mHz to 10 kHz. A typical capacitive semicircle with a time constant (τ = RC) appears at higher frequencies in both plots owing to electron transfer induced by the redox reaction of the ferricyanide/ferrocyanide mediator with the Au electrode. The diagonal line at lower frequencies corresponds to the diffusion-limited Warburg impedance (Figure 7c). Therefore, the equivalent circuit may be a series connection of the charge-transfer resistance and the Warburg impedance, in parallel with the electric double-layer capacitance of the Au electrode (Figure 7c). Assuming the resistance–capacitance (RC) circuit model, the charge-transfer resistance (RCT) was estimated from the intersection of the semicircle plot with the X-axis, and the electric double-layer capacitance (CEDL) was calculated from the frequency corresponding to the vertex of the semicircle (fmax) and RCT as
	(5)
Figure 7

Figure 7. Impedance analysis of aryl-monolayer- and aryl-multilayer-grafted Au electrodes and unmodified Au electrode. (a) Bode plots. (b) Nyquist plots. (c) Equivalent circuit (CE, counter electrode; Rsol, resistance of solution; RCT, resistance of charge transfer; Zw, Warburg impedance; CEDL, capacitance of electric double layer; WE, working electrode).

Table 3 summarizes the parameters of the RC circuits of the aryl-monolayer- and aryl-multilayer-grafted Au electrodes. RCT was larger in the aryl-monolayer-grafted Au electrode than in the aryl-multilayer-grafted Au electrode. That is, some spaces were expected between grafted aryl molecules on the Au electrode in the multilayer; therefore, the redox mediator passed through the aryl-multilayer film, whereas the aryl molecules were expected to be densely tethered without such spaces in the monolayer; hence, the redox mediator did not easily reach the Au surface through the aryl-monolayer film. The EIS analysis clarified and electrochemically characterized the electrografted thin film on the Au electrode with an aryl-monolayer or aryl-multilayer.
Table 3. Impedance Parameters in the RC Circuit of Aryl-Monolayer- and Aryl-Multilayer-Grafted Au Electrodes and Unnmodified Au Electrode
 	parameters
 	fmax (Hz)	CEDL (μF)	RCT (kΩ)
Au	2.6 × 100	5.2 × 100	1.2 × 101
monolayer-grafted Au	2.0 × 10–2	1.2 × 101	6.8 × 102
multilayer-grafted Au	1.6 × 10–1	2.8 × 101	3.5 × 101
Such electrografted aryl-derivative interfaces on Au electrodes can be applied for biomolecular recognition using FET sensors. As mentioned in the above section, the nitro groups in the aryl-derivative monolayer can be reduced to amino groups by CV (Figure S5, Supporting Information), that is, various probe molecules are chemically immobilized by the amino groups in the aryl-derivative monolayer on the Au electrode (Figure S6a, Supporting Information). The principle of FET sensors is based on the potentiometric detection of the change in molecular charges induced by biomolecular recognition events at the gate electrode. In particular, potentiometric sensors can detect changes in the surface charges within the diffusion layer at a distance of nanometer order from the sensing surface, (41−44) which is known as the Debye length; (45) that is, the change in molecular charges should be induced by biomolecular recognition events at a distance of less than the Debye length (Figure S6a, Supporting Information), although we have to examine in the future whether this distance is from the aryl-derivative monolayer or the Au surface. The Debye length at a solution/gate interface based on the electrical double layer (EDL) structure strongly depends on the ionic strength in an electrolyte solution, as expressed by
	(6)
where I is the ionic strength of an electrolyte, ε0 is the permittivity of free space, εr is the dielectric constant, kB is the Boltzmann constant, T is the absolute temperature, NA is the Avogadro number, and e is the elementary charge. (45) Thus, the aryl-derivative monolayer blocks nonspecific signals, owing to the surface redox reactions of low-molecular-weight interference molecules with the Au gate surface of FET sensors (Figures 4 and 5a), where biomolecular recognition events inside the diffusion layer (Debye length) at the solution/gate interface can be detected as the change in the molecular charges on the basis of the principle of FET sensors by controlling the ionic strength in the measurement solution (Figure S6a, Supporting Information). On the other hand, the exposed part of the Au surface among the grafted aryl molecules can be utilized in the case of an aryl-derivative multilayer (Figures 5b and 6). An Au electrode is available for the highly sensitive detection of small biomolecules but without detection selectivity (Figure S1, Supporting Information). When the Au gate surface is chemically modified, so that only a small target biomolecule reaches and directly interacts with the Au electrode, it can be specifically detected. On the basis of this scheme, a polymeric nanofilter interface is designed on the Au electrode (Figure S6b, Supporting Information), (46) where small biomolecules causing interference are trapped so that they do not reach the Au surface, whereas small target biomolecules penetrate into the nanofilter layer and reach and react with the Au surface by redox, causing an electrical signal. Here, the thickness of the filter layer should be controlled to nanometer order so as not to reduce the rate of the electrical response to a small target biomolecule interacting with the Au electrode. Also, the nanofilter membrane is polymerized at a distance further than the Debye length, that is, the electrical noise resulted from the binding events with impurities in the nanofilter membrane is suppressed. Thus, there are some advantages of biomolecular recognition using FET sensors with aryl-derivative films when either a monolayer or a multilayer is electrografted on the Au gate electrode of FET sensors. In particular, the surface properties of the aryl-derivative monolayer or multilayer obtained in this study (Figures S3, 3, and 7 and Tables 2 and 3) should be very meaningful for elucidating the detection principle of FET sensors based on the diffusion layer.
Conclusions
A monolayer film electrografted via diazonium chemistry was effective for controlling the potential response of an FET-based sensor. NBD salt was electrografted on an EG-Au-FET with or without using a radical scavenger by CV, resulting in the formation of a monolayer or multilayer. In particular, the surface coverage of the aryl-derivative monolayer on the Au gate electrode gradually increased with increasing number of potential cycles in CV. Au exhibited a strong catalytic action, resulting in the oxidation of organic compounds, even small biomolecules. Uric acid was used as a low-molecular-weight biomolecule for interference. The denser the surface coverage of the grafted monolayer, the smaller the potential response of the EG-Au-FET because the redox reaction of uric acid with the Au gate surface was suppressed. On the other hand, the effect of the aryl-derivative multilayer on the suppression of the potential response was smaller than that of the monolayer because electrogenerated aryl radicals did not react with the Au surface but with the grafted species, resulting in an exposed part of the Au surface among the grafted aryl molecules. Thus, a platform based on such a monolayer film electrografted via diazonium chemistry is suitable for controlling the potential response based on the interference of low-molecular-weight molecules in biosamples. It can also be used by photolithography and even be subjected to UV irradiation owing to its strong bonds. Other advantages of biomolecular recognition using FET sensors with aryl-derivative films were discussed for the case that either a monolayer or multilayer is electrografted on the Au gate electrode.
Supporting Information
The Supporting Information is available free of charge on the ACS Publications website at DOI: 10.1021/acs.langmuir.9b00085.

Detection of various small biomolecules using the EG-Au-FET sensor; FET real-time measurement; evaluation of the thickness for electrografted films; elemental analyses by XPS; reduction of nitro groups at an aryl-derivative film; and applications of aryl-derivative films (PDF)
S1
Supporting Information
Control of Potential Response to Small Biomolecules with
Electrochemically Grafted Aryl-Based Monolayer in Field-Effect
Transistor-Based Sensors
Shogo Himori,† Shoichi Nishitani,†
and Toshiya Sakata*,†
†Department of Materials Engineering, School of Engineering, The University of Tokyo,
7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8656, Japan
*Corresponding author. E-mail: sakata@biofet.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp
CORRESPONDING AUTHOR FOOTNOTE: Affiliation; Department of Materials
Engineering, School of Engineering, The University of Tokyo, 7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku,
Tokyo 113-8656, Japan, TEL: +81-3-5841-1842, FAX: +81-3-5841-1842
S2
S1. Detection of various small biomolecules using EG-Au-FET sensor
Figure S1. Changes in surface potential of EG-Au-FET for addition of small
biomolecules (kanamycin, uric acid, and dopamine). For all the measurements, a
junction-type FET (Toshiba K246) was used and IDS and VDS were set to 700 μA and
2.5 V, respectively. The Au gate substrate was cleaned using a UV ozone cleaner
(MEIWAFOSIS Co., Ltd., Japan) for 60 min following immersion in Piranha solution
(30 % vol. H2O2/H2SO4=3:7 by volume) for 5 min to remove organic compounds.
S3
S2. FET real-time measurement
Figure S2. Electrical circuit. The change in surface potential (Vout) at the gate was
measured at a constant ID (700 A) and VD (2.5 V) using the source follower circuit.
S4
S3. Evaluation of thickness for electrografted films
Figure S3. Depth profile by laser microscope. a) Aryl-derivative film on Au substrate
electrografted for 5 potential cycles in 1 mM NBD + 25 mM nBuPF6 for multilayer
modification. b) Aryl-derivative film on Au substrate electrografted for 30 potential
cycles in 1 mM NBD + 25 mM nBuPF6 for multilayer modification. c) Aryl-derivative
film on Au substrate electrografted for 100 potential cycles in 1 mM NBD + 25 mM
nBuPF6 + 2 mM DPPH for monolayer modification.
a) b)
c)
S5
S4. Elemental analyses by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy
Elemental analyses were performed on the surfaces of the unmodified Au, the arylderivative monolayer-grafted Au (50 cycles with DPPH), and the aryl-derivativemultilayer-grafted Au (30 cycles without DPPH) by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy
(XPS) (JEOL JPS-9010MC). Excitation X-rays produced from a monochromatic Al Kα
X-ray source at a takeoff angle of 30° were used to observe the elements for the
monolayer and multilayer in detail. (Table 1 and Figure S3).
Figure S4. XPS spectra of Au 4f7/2, N 1s, O 1s, and C 1s for the unmodified Au, the
monolayer-grafted Au, and the multilayer-grafted Au.
S6
S5. Reduction of nitro groups at aryl-derivative film
Figure S5. Cyclic voltammograms for reduction of nitro groups at a) multilayer
electrografted for 5 potential cycles, b) multilayer electrografted for 30 potential
cycles, c) monolayer electrografted for 10 potential cycles, and d) monolayer
electrografted for 50 potential cycles in water/ethanol solution (90/10%) containing
0.1 M KCl at 50 mV/s. The number of CV cycles (i.e. cycle 5) shown in each graph
indicates the one for the reduction of nitro groups in aryl films, which does not mean
the one for the electrografting.
S7
S6. Applications of aryl-derivative film

Figure S6. a) Immobilization of probe molecules at aryl-derived monolayer.
Potentiometric sensors can detect changes in surface charges within the diffusion layer
with a few nanometers from the sensing surface, which is known as the Debye length.
The change in molecular charges should be induced by biomolecular recognition
events at a distance less than the Debye length. b) Polymeric nanofilter interface at
aryl-derived multilayer. Low-molecular-weight interference biomolecules are
captured so that they cannot reach the Au surface, whereas small target biomolecules
penetrate into the nanofilter membrane and reach and react with the Au surface by
redox, resulting in electrical signal generation. The filter layer is located at a distance
further than the Debye length.