Fig. 1. (a) Schematic diagram of InZnxOyEGFET on PET flexible. (b) Functionalization of InZnxOysensing film for dopamine detection. (c) IDS-VREFmeasurement setup for an InZnxOyEGFET pH sensor.

Fig. 2.(a)XRD patternof the InZnxOysensing membrane. (b) AFM image of the InZnxOythin film.

Fig. 3. XPS spectra of (a) In 3d, (b) Zn 2p and (c) O 1s for the InZnxOythin film.

Fig. 4. (a) IDS-VREFtransfer characteristics of the InZnxOyEGFET device in the linear region. Inset: Reference voltage versus pH for the InZnxOyEGFET sensor. (b) IDS-VDSoutput characteristics of the InZnxOyEGFET pH sensor in thesaturation region. Inset: Drain-source current as a function of pH for the InZnxOyEGFET device.

Fig. 5.(a)Hysteresis curveof the InZnxOyEGFET sensor in the pH loop of 7→4→7→10→7. (b) Drift phenomenon of the InZnxOyEGFET sensor measured in the pH 7 for 12 h. (c) pH sensitivity and linearity as a function of bending radius for the InZnxOyEGFET flexible sensor. (d) pH sensitivity and linearity as a function of bending cycle for the InZnxOyEGFET flexible sensor.

Table 1.A comparative analysis offabrication methodand pH sensing performances of previously reported pH sensors with our InZnxOybased EGFET sensor.

Fig. 6. (a) VREF-time curve of the InZnxOyEGFET biosensor for different dopamine concentrations. The inset of figure demonstrates the enlarged IDS-VREFcurves of the InZnxOyEGFET biosensor for different dopamine concentrations. (b) ΔVREFas a function of dopamine concentration for the InZnxOyEGFET biosensor. (c) ΔVREFvalue of the InZnxOyEGFET biosensor for detection of dopamine (DA), ascorbic acid (AA) and uric acid (UA). (d) ΔVREFvalue of the InZnxOyEGFET biosensor for A–D samples, where A is the rat serum, B is the rat brain, C is the dopamine concentration of 1 pM added into the rat serum, and D is the dopamine concentration of 1 pM added into the rat brain.

Table 2. Comparison of analytical characteristics of our InZnxOybased EGFET dopamine sensor with previously reported different electrochemical dopamine sensors.

Hence, dopamine sensing is gaining important attention due to its devastating effects on human health. Classical examination methods like electrochemical sensors, fluorescence detection, colourimetric assay, capillary electrophoresis, and liquid chromatography have been intensively reported for dopamine detection [15–22]. Among these methods, the electrochemical technique is the most promising in addressing this need due to its ability to offer better sensitivity, stability, low cost, reliability, and remote monitoring [23–25].

Normally, it is difficult to break through the Nernst limit for the pH sensitivity of traditional ISFETs (Bergveld et al., 1983). Therefore, most researchers attempt to develop new structures to improve the pH sensitivity, such as extended gate and dual-gate structures (Hong et al., 2021; Palit et al., 2020; Sharma et al., 2020; Lin et al., 2016). The latter choice has been confirmed to be more effective due to its extra-high sensitivity and stability (Zhou et al., 2020).

Cookies are used by this site.Cookie Settings

All content on this site: Copyright ©2025or its licensors and contributors. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. For all open access content, the relevant licensing terms apply.

Outline

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.snb.2020.127850Get rights and content

Full text access

•InZnxOysensing film on flexiblePETusing a simple sol-gel method for anEGFETpH sensor.•InZnxOyEGFETsensor showed an excellent sensing performance in terms of sensitivity, hysteresis and drift.•InZnxOyEGFETflexiblebiosensorexhibited a high sensitivity of 10.69 mV/log(dopamine) in the range from 1 fM to 1 nM.

InZnxOysensing film on flexiblePETusing a simple sol-gel method for anEGFETpH sensor.

InZnxOyEGFETsensor showed an excellent sensing performance in terms of sensitivity, hysteresis and drift.

InZnxOyEGFETflexiblebiosensorexhibited a high sensitivity of 10.69 mV/log(dopamine) in the range from 1 fM to 1 nM.

With the aim of a simple, label-free, and highly specific dopamine detection, we proposed an indium-zinc oxide (InZnxOy) sensing film on flexiblePETusing a simple sol-gel method for an extended gate field-effect transistor (EGFET) sensor. In this study, X-ray diffraction, atomic force spectroscopy, and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy were used to characterize the structural, morphological, and chemical features, respectively. The InZnxOybased EGFET sensor showed a super Nernstian pH response of 61.53 mV/pH with an excellent linearity of 0.995 (in the range of pH 2–12), a low hysteresis voltage of ∼ 3 mV (in the pH loop of 7→4→7→10→7) and a small drift rate of 3.52 mV/h (in the pH 7). Correspondingly, to investigate the impact of mechanical bending on the pH performances of InZnxOybased flexible EGFET sensor, a couple of bending tests, which include different bending radius and bending cycles, were performed. The device showed better mechanical durability up to 1500 bending cycles for pH sensitivity. In order to achieve the label-free detection of dopamine, the InZnxOyon PET-based EGFET was functionalized using a synthetic receptor named 4-carboxylphenylboronic acid, for the covalent binding of dopamine on the sensing surface. The sensitivity of dopamine is 10.69 mV/log(dopamine) with linearity 0.998 within the dopamine concentration range of 1 fM–1 nM and the limit of detection value is 0.523 fM. In addition, this InZnxOybased EGFET biosensor showed excellent selectivity to dopamine over other interfering chemicals. Our proposed InZnxOyEGFET biosensor was successfully applied to detect dopamine level in the real samples like rat blood serum and rat brain.

Neurotransmitteris a chemical agent that facilitates the signaling between neurons to stimulateadjacent neuronsor muscle cells [1]. Dopamine plays a vital role in human body system because it is an excitatorycatecholamineneurotransmitter. Dopamine participates in hormonal regulation, renal, cardiovascular, and central nervous system [[2],[3],[4],[5]]. It is also an important factor in regulating attention, memory, cognition, pleasure, movement, and hormonal operations [6]. An abrupt dysfunctional level of dopamine elicits several kinds ofneurological disorder, such asParkinson disease(PD),attention deficit hyper activity disorder(ADHD) and schizophrenia [7]. In order to address these issues, a minimal concentration of dopamine needs to be detected with high levels of specificity andselectivity.

Accordingly finding a trustworthy mechanism to determine the dopamine level is very necessary in order to estimate the disease progress. In past few decades, lots of analytical approaches have been introduced and reported for dopamine detection, including capillaryelectrophoresismass spectrometry,chromatography, uorimetry, rapidliquid chromatography, andchemiluminescence[[8],[9],[10]]. Although above-mentioned methods have high dopamine detection sensitivity, these processes have some disadvantages, such as complex system, long time consumption, less cost-effective, and required large work space. Thus, the detection of dopamine usingelectrochemical methodis more suitable way to determine the lower concentration of dopamine under physical conditions. With the help of this outlook a simple, less time consumed, high cost-effective, and goodselectivitysystem can be obtained for real-time detection without compromising the sensitivity efficiency [11].Electrochemical sensorsor pH sensors have been widely used in the applications of ion detection and glucose monitoring [12]. A great deal of attention has been given to the exploration of pH sensor for biological detection ofhuman blood, saliva and urine in the clinical setting as a point-of-care-testing (POCT) microsystem because of its disposability, cost-effectiveness and real-time measurement. To measure these phenomena, several solid-state devices, such as ion-sensitive field-effect transistor (ISFET) [13], electrolyte-insulator-semiconductor (EIS) [14], organic thin-film transistor (OTFT) [15], light-addressablepotentiometricsensor (LAPS) [16], and extended-gate field-effect transistor (EGFET) [17], have been developed. ISFET device has been proven to be an attractive candidate forsensor applicationdue to its high sensitivity properties, but it has a major drawback of long-term measurement stability when the sensor exposed in anaqueous electrolytefor a long time, thus resulting in the lifetime degradation of the sensor. To get rid of the previously discussed disadvantage, a combination of ion-sensitive electrode and metal-oxide-semiconductor field-effect transistor (MOSFET) device was constructed for an EGFET sensor. When the field-effect transistor (FET) is directly not immersed in the aqueous electrolyte, this sensor has been represented a very stable measurement for extended period of time. In addition, this approach is very cost-effective, easy fabrication and less sensitive to optical illumination as compared to ISFET [17].

A wide variety ofmetal oxides, e.g. TiO2[18], TiN [19], SnO2[20], ZnO [21],CuO[22], InZnO [23], was commonly used as a sensing film material in an EGFET sensor due to their promising electrical andoptical properties. Amongst these, InZnO film has grabbed a lot of attention for use in sensor devices because it has a low electrical resistivity (3.42 × 10−3Ω-cm) and a high opticaltransmittance(visible range of 50–70 %) [24,25]. In addition, this film is one of themetal oxidesemiconductors to be used asoptoelectronicand transparentconductive coatingfor device component due to its good chemical stability and high melting temperature [26]. Variousdeposition techniques, such aschemical vapor deposition[27], sputtering process [28], sol-gel method [29], have been employed to prepare the sensing film for EGFETs. The sol-gel method offers a wide range of advantages, including homogeneousthin film, uniformity,sensing membranecoating on large-area,high deposition rate, low-cost sensing material [29]. Most importantly, this method does not require any additional annealing temperature to fabricate thethin filmwhich allows it to be a perfect contender for flexible plastic substrates, such aspolyethylene terephthalate(PET) [30],polyimide[31], parylene [32],polycarbonate[33]. These flexible materials usually operated at a temperature below 180 °C to make them very compatible with organic synthesis, evaporation process and sol-gel method. Moreover, the polymeric substrates would tend to be excessively attractive forwearable devicesbecause they have light weight, flexible and inexpensive material to meet the industrial demand of high volume and low cost [34].

In this present work, the detection of dopamine was investigated using an EGFET sensor with InZnxOyon flexible PET through a simple sol-gel technique. Thestructural propertiesof the InZnxOysensing membrane were examined byatomic force microscopy(AFM), X-ray diffraction (XRD), and X-rayphotoelectron spectroscopy(XPS). The sensing performance of InZnxOyEGFET flexible sensor was explored. In addition, the mechanical durability and flexibility of EGFET flexible sensor were examined underbending test. Finally, a combination ofN-ethyl-N’-(3-dimethylaminopropyl)carbodimide (EDC) and N-hydroxysuccinimide (NHS) activated 4-carboxyphenylboronic acid (4-CPBA) to functionalize InZnxOyEGFET sensor surface modified with 3-aminopropyltriethoxysilane (APTES) was used to detect dopamine concentration.

To prepare the InZnxOyfilm,zinc acetate((C2H3O2)2Zn·2H2O, 98 %, Sigma-Aldrich, Germany) andindiumchloride (InCl3, 98 %, Sigma-Aldrich, Germany) were used. Zinc acetate was dissolved indeionized water(18.2 MΩ) as solvent atroom temperature(25 °C). 10 mol% concentration of InCl3was added to the ZnOprecursor solutionand the concentration of the final InZnxOysolution was 0.1 M. Few drops of lactic acid was added to the solution to keep its stability. The prepared solution was aged for at least 24 h and then used for the deposition on aPETsubstrate through a simple sol-gel method.

Indium-tin oxide coatedPET(60 Ω/□, Sigma-Aldrich, USA)flexible substratewas used in this work. Firstly, we took a piece of thePETsubstrate in a size of 2 × 2 cm2cleaned by acetone and then rinsed with DI water, followed by nitrogen flow to dry at 25 °C. Then, the substrate went throughoxygen plasmatreatment by using plasma cleaner (PDC-001, Harrick Plasma) for 5 min in a chamber pressure of 0.5 torr and a plasma power of 30 W to make thehydrophilic surfaceon thePETsubstrate.

A ∼50 nm-thick InZnxOysensing membranewas deposited onPETby a simple spin-coating method with step-I of 500 rpm for 20 s, followed by step-II 5000 rpm for 30 s. The sample was put in the oven at 120 °C for 30 min for soft baking. To determine the sensing area (2 mm2) of the InZnxOyfilm, an automatic robotic dispenser was driven with anadhesive epoxygel used as a separation layer. Copper cladprinted circuit board(PCB) was used as template for the sensor chip. Sample area of 1 × 1 cm2was cut from the InZnxOydeposited on PET substrate to prepare the sensor chip. Afterwards,silverpaste was employed on the edges of InZnxOyfilm and the Cu line of PCB to make a conductive connection between these two. To encapsulateEGFETsensor and the Cu line, an adhesive epoxy gel was applied to avoid the non-sensing area interaction with anelectrolyte solution, as shown inFig. 1(a).Download:Download high-res image (329KB)Download:Download full-size imageFig. 1. (a) Schematic diagram of InZnxOyEGFET on PET flexible. (b) Functionalization of InZnxOysensing film for dopamine detection. (c) IDS-VREFmeasurement setup for an InZnxOyEGFET pH sensor.

The surface modification of InZnxOysensing film to detect dopamine was done by two step processes. One step is that the amino group was introduced by usingAPTES(98 % Alfa Aesar, Great Britain) at 85 °C for 10 min. Another step is that both 10 mMEDC(98 %, Sigma-Aldrich, Germany) and 10 mMNHS(98 %, Sigma-Aldrich, Germany) were used in the activation of 10 μl solution of 1 mM 4-CPBA (Sigma-Aldrich, Germany) to provide thecarboxyl groupreacted with the amino group of APTES. After completion of the functionalization procedure, the samples were washed with 10 mM 2-(N-morpholino)ethanesulfonic acid (MES, 99.5 %, Sigma-Aldrich, Germany) buffer and dried in N2gas. Then, dopamine solutions were prepared in a different concentration in a range of 1 fM–1 nM by usingdopamine hydrochloride(Sigma-Aldrich, Germany) dissolved in 10 mM phosphate buffer saline (PBS) solution (pH 7.4). Finally, the functionalizedEGFETsensor can be used for dopamine detection, as shown inFig. 1(b).

The crystal structure of the InZnxOyfilm was examined by a Rigaku D/MAX 2000XRDwith a Cu Kα(λ = 1.54176 Å) source. Thesurface morphologyof the film was investigated using the tapping mode ofAFMNT-MDT solver P47. Theroot mean square(Rrms) of the height value was calculated from 3 × 3 μm2scans. The chemical bonding of the InZnxOythin filmwas studied using a PhysicalElectronics Quantum2000XPSinstrument equipped with a monochromatic Al Kα(1486.7 eV) source, operated at 40 kV and 30 mA. The spectra were calibrated for a carbon peak excitation at binding energy of 285 eV. The Gaussian-Lorenzian product functions and Shirley background were used to convoluteXPSspectra.Fig. 1(c) shows the schematic diagram of the drain-source current-reference voltage (IDS-VREF) measurement setup for an InZnxOyEGFETpH sensor. All measurements took place in a shielding box in order to prevent any light exposure orelectromagnetic interference. A Texas Instrument n-MOSFET CD4007UBE was used as the FET and connected with the fabricated InZnxOyEGFET device as an extended gate connection. The drain and source of the commercial FET and the Ag/AgClreference electrodewere connected with the port of the Agilent 4156C semiconductor parameter analyzer. The pH sensing properties (sensitivity, hysteresis and drift) of the InZnxOyEGFET sensors were measured in different pH solutions (pH 2–12, 7→4→7→10→7 and pH 7, respectively).

XRD analysiswas performed for the investigation of the crystal structure of the InZnxOyfilm.Fig. 2(a) shows theXRD patternof the InZnxOythin film treated at 120 °C. The data was collected in 2θ range of 20-60° at a scan rate of 0.1°/min. Only a strong PET peak at 2θ = 26.1° was found in theXRD patternbecause the InZnxOyfilm deposited on PET substrate was annealed at low temperature treatment. Therefore, the InZnxOyfilm is of poorcrystalline quality[30].Fig. 2(b) depicts the AFM image of InZnxOyfilm prepared by sol-gel method. Thesurface roughnessof the InZnxOyfilm was estimated to be 3.63 nm. From AFM image, it can be seen that the surface was very smooth and uniformly distributed. A smooth surface on the film leads to lesssurface scattering, resulting in a lower resistivity as well as a higher conductivity.Download:Download high-res image (298KB)Download:Download full-size imageFig. 2.(a)XRD patternof the InZnxOysensing membrane. (b) AFM image of the InZnxOythin film.

We used XPS to have a better understanding for structural and compositional changes of the deposited InZnxOyfilm. In order to get the appropriate peak, an XPS broad survey was performed in the region of obtained peak to exact its spectrum. The results showed the possible peaks for In 3d, Zn 2p and O 1s along with C 1s peak, which depicts the contamination. From XPS peak area, the atomic ratio of In:Zn:O was estimated to be 4.6:31.8:63.6 for InZnxOyfilm. Thestoichiometryof the sensing film can roughly be determined as InZn7O14.Fig. 3(a)–(c) represents all XPS spectra of the In 3d, Zn 2p and O 1s consisting of two peaks corresponding to theirangular momentumof electrons.Fig. 3(a) shows the In atom binding energy region of the XPS spectrum of the deposited InZnxOyfilm. The result showed a good fit for the full width at half maximum (FWHM) of 3d3/2and 3d5/2split peaks of 1.8 and 1.9 eV, respectively. The In 3d3/2peak at 451.9 eV and 3d5/2peak at 444.4 eV with a splitting energy of 7.5 eV for the fabricated film are allotted to the In doped ZnO film, which was reported those at 451.8 and 444.4 eV, respectively, with the same splitting energy [35]. As discussed before, the addition of In in the ZnO film can reduce its resistivity [25].Fig. 3(b) depicts the Zn atom binding energy of XPS spectrum of the fabricated InZnxOysensing film. The spin-orbit splitting of the InZnxOyfilm can be fitted to the Zn 2p1/2and 2p3/2peaks at 1045 and 1021.9 eV, respectively. Furthermore, the FWHM of the Zn 2p1/2and 2p3/2peaks was assigned to be 2.1 and 1.7 eV, respectively. A combination of the In 3d5/2peak observed at 444.4 eV and the Zn 2p3/2peak observed at 1021.9 eV demonstrates that the sol-gel derived film comprises In2O3and ZnO [35]. On the other hand, there is a stoichiometric film associated with In, Zn and O atomic concentrations related to In2O3and ZnO. The O 1s XPS spectrum of the InZnxOyfilm was shown inFig. 3(c). The binding energy of μ' and μ peak for the O 1s spectrum is resolved at 531.6 and 529.8 eV, respectively. The FWHM of the μ' and μ peak was estimated to be 1.84 and 1.37 eV, respectively. It has been reported that the high energy peak of the O 1s stemmed from the oxygen in oxygen-deficient systems, which indicate theoxygen vacancies, and the low energy peak of the O 1s arose from the O2−ions neighboring In atoms [36]. The carrier concentration of transparent conductingoxide filmsis usually responsible forfree electronsarising fromoxygen vacancies.Download:Download high-res image (309KB)Download:Download full-size imageFig. 3. XPS spectra of (a) In 3d, (b) Zn 2p and (c) O 1s for the InZnxOythin film.

Fig. 4(a) demonstrates the IDS-VREFcurves of the InZnxOyEGFET sensor operated in the linear region and measured at various pH values (pH 2–12). According to the MOSFET theory, the relationship between IDSand VREFwas expressed as follows:(1)IDS=μnCoxW2L2VREF−VT(EGFET)VDS−VDS2where μndenotes thecarrier mobilityin the channel, Coxindicates theoxidecapacitance per unit area, W/L represents the channel width to length ratio, VT(EGFET)stands for thethreshold voltageof the EGFET, and VDSsignifies the drain tosource voltage. VT(EGFET)can be represented as the following equation:(2)VT(EGFET)=VT(MOSFET)−φMq+χsol−φ+EREFwhere VT(MOSFET)is the voltage of a MOSFET device, ϕMis thework functionof themetal gate electrode, χsolis thesurface potentialof thebuffer solution, ϕ is the surface potential at the electrolyte and sensingmembrane interface, and EREFis thereference electrodepotential. As shown inFig. 4(a), the shift of the VREFoccurred from the left side to the right side with increasing the pH value, i.e. from higher H+ion concentrationto lower H+concentration (higher OH−concentration). The absorption ability of H+on the surface of InZnxOyfilm in an electrolyte affects the number offree electronsas a majority carrier in n-type channel. The H+ion concentrationin pH 2 is much higher to attract the electrons towards thegate electrode, and thus IDScurrent flows through the channel, giving rise to a lowthreshold voltage. However, with increasing pH value, the concentration of H+ion becomes less to need a high threshold voltage, thereby leading to IDScurrent flowing through the channel. The inset ofFig. 4(a) represents the pH sensitivity and linearity curve for the InZnxOyEGFET sensor. In this study, the pH sensitivity was extracted from IDS-VREFtransfer characteristics at IDS= 100 μA and VDS= 100 mV. The pH sensitivity of the InZnxOyEGFET sensor was 61.53 mV/pH with a linearity of 0.995. In theredox reaction, it was reported that the transfer of less than one electron per proton can enhance the Nernstian response (>59 mV/pH) [37]. The super-Nernstian pH response of our InZnxOysensing film could be contributed to the increased proton-exchange process because of the enhancedoxidationstate of InZnxOyfilm. ThisFig. 4(b) depicts the IDS-VDSoutput characteristics of the InZnxOyEGFET measured at various pH solutions (pH 2–12) and operated in thesaturation region. The current sensitivity in the saturation region was measured at VREF= 2 V. The inset ofFig. 4(b) demonstrates the current sensitivity and the linearity of the InZnxOyEGFET sensor. The output characteristics of the InZnxOybased EGFET sensor shifted from upward to downward with increasing the pH values, i.e. higher H+ion concentrationto lower H+concentration. The pH current sensitivity of the InZnxOysensing film was 0.892 (μA)1/2/pH with a linearity of 0.995.Download:Download high-res image (378KB)Download:Download full-size imageFig. 4. (a) IDS-VREFtransfer characteristics of the InZnxOyEGFET device in the linear region. Inset: Reference voltage versus pH for the InZnxOyEGFET sensor. (b) IDS-VDSoutput characteristics of the InZnxOyEGFET pH sensor in thesaturation region. Inset: Drain-source current as a function of pH for the InZnxOyEGFET device.

To investigate thehysteresis phenomenon, the deposited InZnxOysensing film was immersed in the loop of pH 7→4→7→10→7 over a period of 25 min, as shown inFig. 5(a). For this hysteresis graph, we extracted the data from a set of IDS-VREFtransfer curves with fixed values of VDSand IDSat 100 mV and 100 μA, respectively. The difference between the initial VREFand final VREFvalue in pH 7 was given for the evaluated hysteresis value. The hysteresis value of 3 mV for our InZnxOyfilm was lower than previously reported data [38].Fig. 5(b) shows the drift characteristics of the fabricated InZnxOyEGFET sensor. Basically, the drift voltage is classified as the OH−ions of the pH solution diffusing on the sensing surface, causing the chemical etching mechanism [39]. The drift value within 3−10 mV/h for anISFETor EGFET sensor is considerably small. In this work, the InZnxOyEGFET sensor was measured in pH 7 buffer solution for 12 h to obtain its drift rate [39]. The drift rate was estimated by calculating ΔVREF(=final VREF–initial VREF) divided into total tested time (12 h). The VREFvalue was extracted for each curve at fixed VDSand IDSof 100 mV and 100 μA, respectively. The drift value of the InZnxOyEGFET sensor was 3.52 mV/h. A comparative analysis of pH sensing performance, hysteresis and drift rate of InZnxOybased EGFET flexible sensor, which is compared with previously reported FET based sensors, reveals that our InZnxOyEGFET sensor showed better pH sensitivity, reversibility and stability as shown inTable 1.Download:Download high-res image (361KB)Download:Download full-size imageFig. 5.(a)Hysteresis curveof the InZnxOyEGFET sensor in the pH loop of 7→4→7→10→7. (b) Drift phenomenon of the InZnxOyEGFET sensor measured in the pH 7 for 12 h. (c) pH sensitivity and linearity as a function of bending radius for the InZnxOyEGFET flexible sensor. (d) pH sensitivity and linearity as a function of bending cycle for the InZnxOyEGFET flexible sensor.Table 1.A comparative analysis offabrication methodand pH sensing performances of previously reported pH sensors with our InZnxOybased EGFET sensor.Sensing membraneFabrication methodSensitivity (mV/pH)Hysteresis (mV)Drift rate (mV/h)InZnxOy/PI [38]RF magnetron sputtering56.294.62.8ZnO nano- array [40]Hydrothermal45.00––TiO2[41]RF magnetron sputtering59.895.32.6IrOx[42]Sol-gel51.106.7–ITO [43]RF magnetron sputtering50.10–0.22InZnxOy/PET [this work]Sol-gel61.5333.52

A perspective on the use of flexible sensing membrane, the mechanical durability and flexibility underbending testare of great importance for wearable and portable electronics.Fig. 5(c) depicts the pH sensitivity and linearity of the InZnxOydeposited on flexible PET as a function ofbending radius, varied from 12 to 16 mm. In this study, the InZnxOysensor was mounted on the different radius platforms and afterward pH sensitivity was measured. It is found that the bending radius of InZnxOyfilm gradually decreased with decreasing its pH sensitivity because the increase in the surface resistance, thus resulting in a low conductivity [44]. A slight reduction in the sensitivity of the InZnxOyflexible PET sensor was observed from the bending stress due to the deformation of the sensing film.Fig. 5(d) depicts the pH sensitivity and linearity of the InZnxOysensing membrane fabricated on flexible PET as a function of bending cycles, i.e. 500, 1000, 1500, and 2000, with a bending radius of 16 mm. With increasing the bending cycle, the pH sensitivity of InZnxOyflexible PET slightly reduced because the surface resistance of the sensing membrane increased, hence leading to a lower conductivity [45]. After 1500 bending cycles, the pH sensitivity of the InZnxOyflexible PET kept 56.16 mV/pH, which is a very promising candidate for wearable and portable sensors due to good mechanical durability and flexibility, but a sudden depreciation was observed after 2000 bending cycles because of structural deformation and micro-cracks on the film surface [38].

Electrochemical sensorsusing different sensing membrane materials, e.g. SiO2[46],carbon nanofibers[47],nanomaterials[48], have been developed to detect the dopamine concentration; most dopamine biosensors demonstrated the capability of μM to mM in the literature [48]. Nevertheless, there is a need to build highly sensitive platforms for the capable of sub-nM detection, an EGFET sensor is a promising candidate due to its simple, low-cost and rapid fabrication. The FET sensors with boronic acid-based receptors have been proposed for the detection of dopamine because thisboronic acidcombines with the 1,2- or 1,3-diols of dopamine to produce reversible covalent complexes [46,49]. In this work, we developed the detection of dopamine using a combination of EDC and NHS activated 4-CPBA to immobilize the InZnxOyEGFET sensor surface modified with APTES, as depicted inFig. 1(b). On the InZnxOysensing membrane, the OH groups can covalently bind with theethoxy groupsof APTES to form the amino groups on the surface of the sensor. In EDC, NHS, and 4-CPBA mixture, the functional group of EDC merges with thecarboxyl groupof 4-CPBA to synthesize an activecarboxylic estergroup, which is o-acylisourea ester group. However, the carboxylic ester group can easily react with the amine group to generate an amine-carboxyl complex due to thehydrolysis reaction. To avoid this reaction, additional NHS attached on the carboxylic ester group produces the stable of a syntheticNHS estercompound. Drop the mixture solution onto the InZnxOyfilm surface modified with APTES, a synthetic NHS ester compound reacts with the amine group to form anamidebond [46].

When the dopamine is combined with the 4-CPBA, the dopamine provides -NH2group to obtain positively charged on InZnxOysurface, as shown inFig. 1(b). Due to the positive charge on the surface, the amino (–NH3+) group on InZnxOysurface could attract more electrons in the MOSFET channel and the transfer curve is shifted towards the negative VREFdirection. The interaction between 4-CPBA and dopamine depends on pH solution. The pH 7.4 has been specially selected to create acovalent bondwith dopamine on the functionalized sensing surface and to avoid the polymerization of dopamine (at pH> 8–8.5) [50]. Moreover, the pKavalue of dopamine is around 10 for the amine moieties. It also provides some positive charge in the form of ethylammonium chain (R-NH3+) at physiological pH 7.4 [51]. This positive charge R-NH3+of dopamine on the sensing surface combined with the electron at the gate electrode, resulting in the shift in the VREF. To examine the sensing performance of functionalized InZnxOysensing membrane for detection of dopamine, the measurement was undertaken in the pH 7.4. The drain-source current does not vary as the dopamine concentration is raised more than 10 nM. This behavior is attributed to the fact that all 4-CPBA molecules of the sensing surface merged with dopamine reach saturation.Fig. 6(a) demonstrates the VREF-time curve of the InZnxOyEGFET biosensorfor various dopamine concentrations. The enlarged IDS-VREFcurves of the InZnxOyEGFETbiosensorfor detection of different dopamine concentrations are shown in the inset ofFig. 6(a). The data was extracted from a set of IDS-VREFtransfer curves with a fixed value of IDSat 100 μA. The VREFvalue clearly decreased with increasing the dopamine concentration, suggesting that the positively charged amino (–NH3+) group of dopamine is increased. Moreover, it is worth emphasizing that these VREFvalues were more stable for various dopamine concentrations after each 5-min period.Fig. 6(b) shows the extracted ΔVRFEas a function of dopamine concentration for the InZnxOyEGFET biosensor. The dopamine sensitivity of our InZnxOyEGFET biosensor was estimated to be 10.69 mV/log(dopamine) with an excellent linearity value of 0.998 and a better limit of detection (LOD) of 0.523 fM. The fabricated InZnxOyflexible biosensors also showed more stable for dopamine detection.Debye lengthis an important role in an aqueous salt environment to influence the performance of an EGFET device. TheDebye length(λD) with 10 mM PBS buffer solution was estimated to be ∼3.1 nm by using a simple formula [52]: λD= 0.32(I)−0.5, where I is the ionicstrengthof thePBS solution. An appropriateDebye lengthis expected to be long enough to diminish the electro-static screening by using a 10 mM PBS buffer solution. Hence, a relatively low dopamine concentration can be detected near the EGFET surface functionalized with 4-CPBA.Download:Download high-res image (346KB)Download:Download full-size imageFig. 6. (a) VREF-time curve of the InZnxOyEGFET biosensor for different dopamine concentrations. The inset of figure demonstrates the enlarged IDS-VREFcurves of the InZnxOyEGFET biosensor for different dopamine concentrations. (b) ΔVREFas a function of dopamine concentration for the InZnxOyEGFET biosensor. (c) ΔVREFvalue of the InZnxOyEGFET biosensor for detection of dopamine (DA), ascorbic acid (AA) and uric acid (UA). (d) ΔVREFvalue of the InZnxOyEGFET biosensor for A–D samples, where A is the rat serum, B is the rat brain, C is the dopamine concentration of 1 pM added into the rat serum, and D is the dopamine concentration of 1 pM added into the rat brain.

The previously reported results are demonstrated inTable 2. The dopamine sensitivity, linearity and LOD of our InZnxOyEGFET sensor were estimated to be 10.69 mV/log(dopamine), 0.998 and 0.523 fM, respectively, exceeded compared to other dopamine biosensors using IZO/ITOglass substrate[53], cylindrical gold nano-electrode [54], GO/AuNP [55], andcarbon nano fiber[56].Table 2. Comparison of analytical characteristics of our InZnxOybased EGFET dopamine sensor with previously reported different electrochemical dopamine sensors.ElectrodeFabrication MethodLinear rangeLinearityLODIZO/ITO glass substrate [53]RF sputtering0.1 nM–1.0 μM--0.1 nMCylindrical gold nano electrode [54]Laser lithography and electrochemical deposition1–100 μM0.995.83 μMGO/AuNP [55]Redox reaction0.08–20 μM0.9985 nMCarbon nano fiber [56]Chemical vapor deposition1–10 μM0.997100 nMInZnxOy(this work)Sol-gel1 fM–1nM0.9980.523 fM

To evaluate the applicability andselectivityof the fabricated InZnxOyEGFET biosensor, two interfering chemicals were tested under same conditions, while theascorbic acidanduric acidcoexist with dopamine in the extracellular fluid of the central nervous system [57]. The concentration of theascorbic acidanduric acidwere 100 μM, whereas the dopamine was 1 nM. The ΔVREFof the InZnxOybased EGFET biosensor containing 1 nM dopamine exhibited noticeable change than those of two interfering substances [Fig. 6(c)]. It should be highlighted that the shift ofreference voltageshowed negligible intensification with these interfering chemicals even at high concentration. The results disclosed that the interfering substances had no consequence on dopamine detection. Hence, this InZnxOyEGFET biosensor has an excellentselectivityto detect dopamine.

The InZnxOyEGFET biosensor was demonstrated in the addition of analyte (dopamine hydrochloride) in the biological samples (Rattus norvegicus serum and brain). In order to execute the real sample analysis, a known concentration of dopamine was added into the rat serum. The IDS-VREFcurves were recorded using InZnxOyEGFET biosensor in the rat serum sample with and without adding the dopamine concentration of 1 pM.Fig. 6(d) depicts that the resulted VREFshift for the rat serum sample with and without adding the dopamine concentration of 1 pM was 0 and 41.09 ± 0.09 mV, respectively. For the dopamine concentration of 1 pM added into the serum sample, this VREFshift corresponded to the dopamine concentration of 0.97 ± 0.02 pM, which is also consistent with previous addition of dopamine concentration of 1 pM in the rat serum. In addition, the rat brain sample (stored at −4 °C for 3 days) was directly detected using InZnxOyEGFET biosensor and the result was no VREFshift, which is free of dopamine, as shown inFig. 6(d). In contrast, the VREFshift was 41.07 ± 0.21 mV in the dopamine concentration of 1 pM injected into the rat brain sample. The InZnxOyEGFET biosensor showed well defined IDScurrent changes for dopamine presented in rat brain samples. The VREFshift of 41.07 ± 0.21 mV corresponding to the dopamine concentration was determined to be 0.97 ± 0.04 pM fromFig. 6(a), which is in good agreement with previously adding dopamine concentration of 1 pM. To achieve a dopamine biosensor, the concentration of real dopamine in the rat brains (fresh) through our InZnxOyEGFET biosensor was detected to be 16.64 ± 1.8 pM/mg. The InZnxOyEGFET biosensor demonstrated the dopamine detection in dopamine injected the serum sample and real brain, it offers the great potential for practical application in pharmaceutical analysis and medical diagnosis.

In this study, we have proposed a sol-gel synthesized InZnxOythin film on a flexible PET substrate for an EGFET pH sensor and employed this sensor functionalized with asynthetic receptor(4-CPBA) for dopamine detection. The InZnxOyfilm prepared under low-temperature thermal treatment (120 °C) featured anamorphous structure(from XRD), a uniform and smooth surface (from AFM), and the presence of In2O3and ZnO components (from XPS). The InZnxOybased EGFET flexible sensor showed super-Nernstian pH sensing properties with a high pH value of 61.53 mV/pH, and better stability with a low hysteresis value of 3 mV as well as a small drift value of 3.52 mV/h. Additionally, The InZnxOyEGFET flexible sensor exhibited goodmechanical stabilitythrough differentbending radiusand repetitive bending cycle tests (up to 1500 cycles). Accordingly, the development of label-free dopamine detection method, the sensing surface functionalized with 4-CPBA promotes the evolution of positively charged ethylammonium chain after covalent binding with dopamine in pH 7.4. The InZnxOybased EGFET flexiblebiosensorcan be able to detect the dopamine with the sensitivity and linearity of 10.69 mV/log(dopamine) and 0.998, respectively, in a dopamine concentration range of 1 fM to 1 nM with a LOD value of 0.523 fM. Furthermore, the dopamine detection ofEGFET biosensorrepresents a noticeable change in VREFcompared to other interfering chemical components (ascorbic acid and uric acid) which co-exist with dopamine in the central nervous system. This method tends to be innovative in the detection of dopamine levels in the real samples of rat blood andbrain tissues. As the level of dopamine concentration is drastically decreasing inneurological diseases, so our InZnxOybased EGFET biosensor with a low dopamine concentration detection (1 fM) ability will be satisfactory to use in healthcare diagnosis of dopamine level in neurological disorders.

The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.

The authors would like to thanksChang Gung Memorial HospitalandMinistry of Science and Technology (MOST), Taiwanfor Financial supporting this research under contract of CMRPD2H0151 and CMRPD2H0152 and MOST-108-2221-E-182-023, respectively.

The following is Supplementary data to this article:Download:Download zip file (395B)

An electrochemical platform based on yttrium oxide/boron nitride nanocomposite for the detection of dopamine2021, Sensors and Actuators B: ChemicalCitation Excerpt :Hence, dopamine sensing is gaining important attention due to its devastating effects on human health. Classical examination methods like electrochemical sensors, fluorescence detection, colourimetric assay, capillary electrophoresis, and liquid chromatography have been intensively reported for dopamine detection [15–22]. Among these methods, the electrochemical technique is the most promising in addressing this need due to its ability to offer better sensitivity, stability, low cost, reliability, and remote monitoring [23–25].Show abstractDopamine is an essential neurotransmitter for intercellular communication in the living organisms. Miniature sensors for dopamine detection, which rely on the electrochemical sensor with hybrid materials, cannot provide continuous monitoring and comes with several practical limits. High selectivity and sensitivity testified by human samples as well as low limit of detection are still challenging. This work reports the nanocomposite synthesis of yttrium oxide decorated on boron nitride (YO/BN) by a feasible sonochemical route for electrochemical detection of dopamine. Diverse microscopic and spectroscopic techniques are utilized to confirm the formation and the characteristics of the YO/BN nanocomposite. Compared to bare, YO- and BN-modified electrodes, the YO/BN modified electrode displays the superior electrochemical performance toward the detection of dopamine. Our electrochemical platform exhibits a wide linear range (0.008–241 μM), low detection limit (0.0003 µM) and high sensitivity (1.09 µA µM−1cm−2) by the amperometric measurement. Furthermore, the proposed electrochemical sensor satisfies the clinical requirement in terms of reproducibility, selectivity, stability and recovery. The obtained results confirm that the proposed YO/BN based sensor can be used for the quantification analysis of dopamine in health management and clinical applications.A handheld testing device for the fast and ultrasensitive recognition of cardiac troponin I via an ion-sensitive field-effect transistor2021, Biosensors and BioelectronicsCitation Excerpt :Normally, it is difficult to break through the Nernst limit for the pH sensitivity of traditional ISFETs (Bergveld et al., 1983). Therefore, most researchers attempt to develop new structures to improve the pH sensitivity, such as extended gate and dual-gate structures (Hong et al., 2021; Palit et al., 2020; Sharma et al., 2020; Lin et al., 2016). The latter choice has been confirmed to be more effective due to its extra-high sensitivity and stability (Zhou et al., 2020).Show abstractCardiac troponin I (cTnI) is an efficient and specific biomarker for the accurate diagnosis of acute myocardial infarction (AMI), one of the diseases with the highest mortality worldwide. Due to the short course and high fatality of this disease, a rapid, accurate and portable device for quantitative detection is urgently needed for early diagnosis and treatment. In this work, we designed a handheld device based on a dual-gate ion-sensitive field-effect transistor (ISFET) for early and accurate warning of AMI through cTnI detection. A one-step enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay strategy was proposed for use in this device to recognize trace cTnI in serum, converting the cTnI concentration to a drain-source current generated by an ultrasensitive ISFET. This portable device exhibited an ultrahigh sensitivity of 132 pA pg−1·mL−1, a wide linear range from 1 to 1000 pg/mL that enabled coverage far exceeding the threshold level (280 pg/mL), and a low detection limit of 0.3 pg/mL for the cTnI assay, which was much lower than the current diagnostic cut-off for a healthy control level for AMI (40 pg/mL). In addition, this handheld device showed satisfactory selectivity and reliable results in the analysis of real serum within 20 min, indicating its potential applications in early screening and diagnosis for the clinical evaluation of AMI.Metal-Oxide Nanomaterials Synthesis and Applications in Flexible and Wearable Sensors2022, ACS Nanoscience AuLarge-Area Interfaces for Single-Molecule Label-free Bioelectronic Detection2022, Chemical ReviewsExtended gate field-effect-transistor for sensing cortisol stress hormone2021, Communications MaterialsA decoupler-free simple paper microchip capillary electrophoresis device for simultaneous detection of dopamine, epinephrine and serotonin2020, RSC AdvancesView all citing articles on Scopus

An electrochemical platform based on yttrium oxide/boron nitride nanocomposite for the detection of dopamine2021, Sensors and Actuators B: ChemicalCitation Excerpt :Hence, dopamine sensing is gaining important attention due to its devastating effects on human health. Classical examination methods like electrochemical sensors, fluorescence detection, colourimetric assay, capillary electrophoresis, and liquid chromatography have been intensively reported for dopamine detection [15–22]. Among these methods, the electrochemical technique is the most promising in addressing this need due to its ability to offer better sensitivity, stability, low cost, reliability, and remote monitoring [23–25].

Citation Excerpt :Hence, dopamine sensing is gaining important attention due to its devastating effects on human health. Classical examination methods like electrochemical sensors, fluorescence detection, colourimetric assay, capillary electrophoresis, and liquid chromatography have been intensively reported for dopamine detection [15–22]. Among these methods, the electrochemical technique is the most promising in addressing this need due to its ability to offer better sensitivity, stability, low cost, reliability, and remote monitoring [23–25].

Dopamine is an essential neurotransmitter for intercellular communication in the living organisms. Miniature sensors for dopamine detection, which rely on the electrochemical sensor with hybrid materials, cannot provide continuous monitoring and comes with several practical limits. High selectivity and sensitivity testified by human samples as well as low limit of detection are still challenging. This work reports the nanocomposite synthesis of yttrium oxide decorated on boron nitride (YO/BN) by a feasible sonochemical route for electrochemical detection of dopamine. Diverse microscopic and spectroscopic techniques are utilized to confirm the formation and the characteristics of the YO/BN nanocomposite. Compared to bare, YO- and BN-modified electrodes, the YO/BN modified electrode displays the superior electrochemical performance toward the detection of dopamine. Our electrochemical platform exhibits a wide linear range (0.008–241 μM), low detection limit (0.0003 µM) and high sensitivity (1.09 µA µM−1cm−2) by the amperometric measurement. Furthermore, the proposed electrochemical sensor satisfies the clinical requirement in terms of reproducibility, selectivity, stability and recovery. The obtained results confirm that the proposed YO/BN based sensor can be used for the quantification analysis of dopamine in health management and clinical applications.

A handheld testing device for the fast and ultrasensitive recognition of cardiac troponin I via an ion-sensitive field-effect transistor2021, Biosensors and BioelectronicsCitation Excerpt :Normally, it is difficult to break through the Nernst limit for the pH sensitivity of traditional ISFETs (Bergveld et al., 1983). Therefore, most researchers attempt to develop new structures to improve the pH sensitivity, such as extended gate and dual-gate structures (Hong et al., 2021; Palit et al., 2020; Sharma et al., 2020; Lin et al., 2016). The latter choice has been confirmed to be more effective due to its extra-high sensitivity and stability (Zhou et al., 2020).

Citation Excerpt :Normally, it is difficult to break through the Nernst limit for the pH sensitivity of traditional ISFETs (Bergveld et al., 1983). Therefore, most researchers attempt to develop new structures to improve the pH sensitivity, such as extended gate and dual-gate structures (Hong et al., 2021; Palit et al., 2020; Sharma et al., 2020; Lin et al., 2016). The latter choice has been confirmed to be more effective due to its extra-high sensitivity and stability (Zhou et al., 2020).

Cardiac troponin I (cTnI) is an efficient and specific biomarker for the accurate diagnosis of acute myocardial infarction (AMI), one of the diseases with the highest mortality worldwide. Due to the short course and high fatality of this disease, a rapid, accurate and portable device for quantitative detection is urgently needed for early diagnosis and treatment. In this work, we designed a handheld device based on a dual-gate ion-sensitive field-effect transistor (ISFET) for early and accurate warning of AMI through cTnI detection. A one-step enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay strategy was proposed for use in this device to recognize trace cTnI in serum, converting the cTnI concentration to a drain-source current generated by an ultrasensitive ISFET. This portable device exhibited an ultrahigh sensitivity of 132 pA pg−1·mL−1, a wide linear range from 1 to 1000 pg/mL that enabled coverage far exceeding the threshold level (280 pg/mL), and a low detection limit of 0.3 pg/mL for the cTnI assay, which was much lower than the current diagnostic cut-off for a healthy control level for AMI (40 pg/mL). In addition, this handheld device showed satisfactory selectivity and reliable results in the analysis of real serum within 20 min, indicating its potential applications in early screening and diagnosis for the clinical evaluation of AMI.

Metal-Oxide Nanomaterials Synthesis and Applications in Flexible and Wearable Sensors2022, ACS Nanoscience Au

Large-Area Interfaces for Single-Molecule Label-free Bioelectronic Detection2022, Chemical Reviews

Extended gate field-effect-transistor for sensing cortisol stress hormone2021, Communications Materials

A decoupler-free simple paper microchip capillary electrophoresis device for simultaneous detection of dopamine, epinephrine and serotonin2020, RSC Advances

Sayani Palitreceived the B.Sc. degree in life science from the CSJM University, Kanpur, U. P.,. In 2015, she is pursuing his Ph.D. degree in department of electronics at Chang Gung University. His main research interest is fabrication of EIS sensor and its reliability, flexible substrate based EGFET sensor using sol-gel synthesis process and further its application for development of efficient immobilization procedure to detect various kinds of biomolecule.

Kanishk Singhreceived the B.Sc. degree in life science from the CSJM University, Kanpur, U. P., India, in 2008 and the M.Sc. degrees in Biotechnology from the Amity University, Noida U.P., India, in 2010. In 2013, he is pursuing his Ph.D. degree in department of electronics at Chang Gung University. His main research interest is fabrication of EIS sensor and its reliability, flexible substrate based EGFET sensor using sol-gel synthesis process and further its application for development of efficient immobilization procedure to detect various kinds of biomolecule.

Bih-Show Loureceived her B.S. Degree in Chemistry in 1984 at the National Kaohsiung Normal University, Taiwan. She then went to University of New Mexico, USA where she received her Ph.D. with Prof. Mark R. Ondrias in Biophysical Chemistry in 1993, then was a postdoctoral fellow at University of Arizona with Victor J. Hruby, Regents Professor. She is currently a professor at the Chemistry Division, Center for General Education, Chang Gung University, Taiwan. Her current research interests include LC/MS-based metabolomic approach for exercise physiology studies, spectroscopy for chemical and nanomaterial analysis, electrochemistry for biosensor applications, and surface modification engineering by thin film metallic glasses and plasma electrolytic oxidation processes.

Jim-Long Herwas born in Kaohsiung, Taiwan, 1976. He received the B. S. degree and the Ph. D. degree from the, Taiwan, R. O. C., in 1999 and in 2005, respectively. From 2006 to 2008, he was a postdoctoral researcher in Department of Physics, Center for Nano Science and Nano Technology, National Sun Yat-sen University (NSYSU). He worked on the magnetic and dielectric properties of the spin-frustrated materials and the multiferroic compounds. Then, he transferred to International MegaGauss Science Laboratory, Institute for Solid State Physics, University of Tokyo, as a postdoctoral Reseacher. He participated in construction of a portable pulsed magnet, which can be used in High-field X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS), X-ray magnetic circular dichroism (XMCD), and High-field X-ray diffraction in synchrotron radiation facilities. In 2010, he joined the faculty at Chang Gung University as an assistant professor in Division of Natural Science, Center for General Education. He has published more than 20 SCI papers in the field of magnetism physics. His research interests include the Magnetic, electric transport, and optical properties of multiferroic materials, low-dimensional spin system, and novel superconductors in high-magnetic fields.

Tung-Ming Panwas born in Taipei, Taiwan, in 1970. He received a B.S. from the Department of Electronics Engineering, National Chiao-Tung University (NCTU), Taiwan, R.O.C., in 1997 and a Ph.D. from the Institute of Electronics, NCTU, in 2001. He won first prize in the Lam Ph.D. Dissertation Award in 2001. From 2000 to 2002, he worked in the LOGIC Development Department, Technology and Process Development Division, United Microelectronics Corporation (UMC), as a Principal Engineer. He was engaged in developing 0.1-mm devices and processes. He then transferred to the Reliability Engineering, Quality, and Reliability Assurance Division, where he was responsible for testing 0.1-mm devices’ reliability and quality. In 2002, he joined the mixed signal team as a Senior Engineer at Elansat Tech. Corp., where he was involved in designing high-speed analog-to-digital and digital-to-analog converters. In 2004, he joined the faculty at Chang Gung University as an Assistant Professor in the Department of Electronics Engineering, becoming a Professor in 2009. He has published more than 140 SCI papers and 70 conference papers, and is author or co-author of ten patents. His currently research areas focus on the high-k gate dielectric materials, nonvolatile memories, thin-film transistors (TFTs), nano CMOS devices and technologies, reliability of semiconductor devices, biosensor materials and devices.

View details