Fig. 1. (a) Device structure and (b) sensing scheme of the GONR-FET biosensor.

Fig. 2.(a) SEM and (b) TEM images of as-producedGONR. and (c)Raman spectraof startingMWCNT(blue lines) and as-producedGONR(red lines). (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article)

Fig. 3.(a) The drain current–voltage output characteristics for the rGONR- and GONR-FET biosensor. The concentration of methylene blue (MB) is varied from 0.025–0.3M was used for detection in a rGONRFET. And the concentration of MB is varied from 0.8 to 3mM for detection in a rGONRFET. (b) The drain current-voltage output characteristics for rGONR FET biosensor that immersed in 0.3M of MB, immersed in theDI waterand blow-dry and measured in the air, respectively. The drain sensing current is invaried.

Fig. 4.(a) The semi-logarithm plot of the detection current of a rGONR FET biosensor along with MB concentration for differentdrain voltage(5μV, 3 V and 5 V). The sensitivity is calculated as 7.8 μA/mM, 16.5 μA/mM and 28.9 μA/mM, respectively. (b) The logarithm plot of the detection current of a GONR FET biosensor along with MB concentration for different drain voltage (5 μV, 3 V and 5 V). The sensitivity is calculated as 2.7 μA/mM, 7.8 μA/mM and 12.5 μA/mM, respectively. Consider the signal-to-noise (SNR) of 10, the detection limit is estimated by extrapolate plot to as 4.7 nM of MB.

Fig. 5.(a) TheRaman spectraand (b) the I2D/IGand I2D/IDof the GONR after MB immersion with different concentrations.

Fig. 6.TheXPSC1s peaks for (a) pristine GONR and (b) 0.1M and (c) 0.3 M MB immersed GONR.

Table 1. The atomic concentration for C–C, C–O, C=O and O–C=O bondings in the XPS C1s peak of GONR after methylene blue immersion.

Cookies are used by this site.Cookie Settings

All content on this site: Copyright ©2025or its licensors and contributors. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. For all open access content, the relevant licensing terms apply.

These cookies are necessary for the website to function and cannot be switched off in our systems. They are usually only set in response to actions made by you which amount to a request for services, such as setting your privacy preferences, logging in or filling in forms. You can set your browser to block or alert you about these cookies, but some parts of the site will not then work. These cookies do not store any personally identifiable information.

These cookies enable the website to provide enhanced functionality and personalisation. They may be set by us or by third party providers whose services we have added to our pages. If you do not allow these cookies then some or all of these services may not function properly.

These cookies allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors move around the site.

These cookies may be set through our site by our advertising partners. They may be used by those companies to build a profile of your interests and show you relevant adverts on other sites. If you do not allow these cookies, you will experience less targeted advertising.

Outline

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bios.2016.03.046Get rights and content

Full text access

•We developed anfield effect transistor biosensorutilizedgraphene oxidenanoribbon for Methylene Blue (MB) sensing.•The GONR-FET demonstrated a 12.5μA/mM sensitivity and 4.7nM detection limit.•The materials quality of the GONR was improved and the domain size for the C=C sp2bonding was improved after MB detection.

We developed anfield effect transistor biosensorutilizedgraphene oxidenanoribbon for Methylene Blue (MB) sensing.

The GONR-FET demonstrated a 12.5μA/mM sensitivity and 4.7nM detection limit.

The materials quality of the GONR was improved and the domain size for the C=C sp2bonding was improved after MB detection.

In this work, we developed afield effect transistor(FET) biosensor utilizing solution-processedgraphene oxidenanoribbon(GONR) for methylene blue (MB) sensing. MB is a unique material; one of its crucial applications is as a marker in the detection of biomaterials. Therefore, a highly sensitive biosensor with a low detection limit that can be fabricated simply in a noncomplex detection scheme is desirable. GONR is made by unzipping multiwallcarbon nanotubes, which can be mass-produced at low temperature. The GONR-FET biosensor demonstrated a sensitivity of 12.5μA/mM (determined according to the drain current difference caused by the MB concentration change). TheRaman spectraindicate that the materials quality of the GONR and the domain size for the C=C sp2bonding were both improved after MB detection. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy revealed that the hydroxyl groups on the GONR were removed by the reductive MB. According to XPS and Raman, the positive charge is proposed to transfer from MB to GONR during sensing. This transfer causes charge in-neutrality in the GONR which is compensated by releasing •OH functional groups. With high sensitivity, a low detection limit, and a simple device structure, the GONR-FET sensor is suitable for sensing biomaterials.

Methylene blue (MB) is a crucial chemical that has wide-ranging applications. It is used in analytical chemistry as a pH indicator (Deboux et al., 1995); dye for cellulose and bacteria (Wu et al., 2009,Zhou et al., 2014); and agar for bacteria such asEscherichia coli, gram-negative bacteria,Salmonella, andShigella(Taylor, 1971;Usacheva et al., 2001) as well as a marker for DNA (Liu et al., 2012,Rafiee-Pour et al., 2016) and damaged DNA that lead to cancer (Gruetter et al., 1981,Soni et al., 2009). By detecting the concentration of the MB, the information that including the pH value, the redox level, the DNA's concentration, and the bacteria's growth rate can be obtained under a controlled sensing environment. To design a biosensor, two issues are critical: sensing techniques and sensor materials. For the techniques, both electrical and optical methods are used for detecting MB. For optical detection, the shift in Ag nanoparticles'plasmonicresonance peaks in the presence of MB were recorded to identify the concentration (Luo et al., 2013). By comparing the optical signals for the reference MB with known concentration and the MB with species to be detected, the shift in the spectra could deduce the concentration of the species under test. In addition to plasmonic resonance, the intensity of opticalexcitation spectrafor MB in photoreduction experiments is used to determine the concentration (Kadokawa et al., 2011). Moreover, MB has been used in the capture probe–target–signal probeelectrochemical sensingmethod forE. colidetection (Li et al., 2015). Electrically, the cyclicvoltammetryand amperometric measurements are used detect horseradishperoxidaseby coimmobilized with methylene blue onto a carbonelectrode surface. The feasibility of MB as an electron carrier between peroxidase and the carbon electrode were detected (Xu et al., 2003). Square-wave voltammetry utilizes the redox behaviors of MB in the presence of the species being detected (Lovrić and Komorsky-Lovric, 1988,Xu et al., 2003). And the ion-sensitive field effect transistor (ISFET) based onSiliconwas used for DNA and biomaterials detection (Lee et al., 2009,Zayats et al., 2006). The ISFET could either conduction current or the threshold voltage shift for bio-detection. Upon the binding of to the cognate aptamer, changes in the electrical signal were monitored with an ISFET. By immobilization of amine-functionalized aptamer on the gate surface, the ISFET is used to sense adenosine in a detection limit of approximately 5×10−5M and showed high specificity. Theoretically, FET based structure detect electrical signal caused by the charge transfer which is essentially counted by number of electrons that enabling high sensitivity detection because the instruments used in current detection generally exhibit pA to fA detection ability. On the contrary, the setup for detection small amount of photons is sophisticated and costly. Therefore, the FET based electricaldetection probabilitythe better choice for compact, label-free and precise biosensor.

On the other hand, material is a critical issue. Recent development of graphene oxide (GO) may provide a multifunction platform for variety of biomaterial detection for it is possible to decorated surface by carboxyl, hydroxyl, epoxy and other specific functional groups that facilitate specificity (Liu et al., 2010). In their work, the biocompatibility of GO was demonstrated on a cell line derived from human retinal pigment epithelium that exhibit good adhesion and differentiation on theGO filmand is visualized after 72h of culture time. In addition, many biosensors utilize graphene oxide was reported. The graphene oxide was used in an Immuno-biosensor for pathogen detection (Jung et al., 2010). Used for bovine albumin serum adsorption in asurface plasmonresonance structure (Chiu and Huang, 2014).The fluorescent of the aptamer-functionalized graphene oxide for mercury(II) detection were also reported (Huang et al., 2014,Li et al., 2013). The GO was blended with chitosan asnanocompositefor typhoid detection (Singh et al., 2013). Recently, the graphene oxide was used to detect the platelet-derivedmicroparticles, which is a major risk factor for arterial pro-thrombotic pathologies (Kailashiya et al., 2015). Since many chemicals and biomaterials are in solution form, and direct measurement in solution is more efficient and useful. In this work, we derived GO from Graphene nanoribbon (GNR). GNR is a unique form of graphene that has spurred intensive interest because of its exceptional electronic property, thermal stability, and lowpercolation threshold(Han et al., 2007,Li et al., 2008,Son et al., 2006). Recent theoretical and experimental works have demonstrated that GNR is a promising material for numerous applications such as inenergy generationand storage (Liu et al., 2014a,Uthaisar and Barone, 2010;Wang 2015), chemicals and biosensors (Hou et al., 2014,Wang et al., 2010), catalysis (Davis et al., 2014,Holby and Taylor, 2012), andnanoelectronics(Fiori and Iannaccone, 2007,Wang et al., 2008). In general, GNR represents a long strip of graphene with width ranging from sub-10nm to several hundrednanometerswhile the thickness is about of several nanometers. (Cai et al., 2010,Han et al., 2007,Kosynkin et al., 2009,Ma et al., 2013a,Shimizu et al., 2011). Unlikegraphene sheetsthat feature a zero bandgap, GNR possesses an open bandgap that can be controlled by tuning atomic-scale structures. For example, GNR with designed edges can effectively modulate the electronic energy gap, thus enhancing the charge transfer and chemical reactivity when used for chemical and biological detection. The reduction of graphene oxide nanoribbon (GONR) is a promising alternative for the bulk production of GNR-based materials because it can be synthesized in large quantities (Ma et al., 2013b). (Kosynkin et al., 2009,Shimizu et al., 2011) successfully mass produced GONR throughchemical oxidationby longitudinally cutting and unraveling multiwalledcarbon nanotubes(MWCNTs) in concentrated sulfuric acid andpotassiumpermanganate. Longitudinally unzipping carbon nanotubes through chemicaloxidationwith a suitable oxidant should be one of the most effective means of achieving low-cost and scalable GNR synthesis (Ma et al., 2013a). In addition, this method can be used to generate oxygen-containing groups around the GNRs, thus adding solution-processing ability to the GNR process for industry-oriented device preparation (Liu et al., 2014b).

In this work, we utilized an field effect transistor (FET) in a solution as a biosensor in which the FET-based biosensor potentially exhibits high sensitivity and a low detection limit (Lee et al., 2009). GONR was used as the detection materials for its exceptional oxidation level tunable conductivity. Furthermore, the MB was used as the detection target to demonstrate the biomaterialdetectabilityin GONR FET biosensors for its wide application and especially because it is usually used as an indicator/marker for the biomaterials.

Potassiumpermanganate (KMnO4, 98%),hydrogen peroxide(H2O2,35%), and ether [(C2H5)2O, 99+%] were purchased from Acros. Potassium nitrate (KNO3, 95%) and ethylene glycol [C2H4(OH)2, 99%] were obtained from JT-Baker. Sulfuric acid (H2SO4, >95%) andhydrochloric acid(HCl, 37%) were purchased from Scharlau. N-Butanol (C4H9OH, >99%) was purchased from Merck. Methylene blue (3,7-bis(Dimethylamino)phenazathionium chloride, C16H18ClN3S·xH2O), with high purity and biological stain certification was purchase from Alfa Aesar. All the chemicals were used without any further purification.

The CNTs used in the present study were MWCNTs synthesized through water-assisted catalyticchemical vapor deposition. The CNT growth process and GONR preparation were similar to those previously described (Chiang et al., 2011,Chiang et al., 2015;Wang, 2015). In a typical preparation of GONR, 0.1 g of MWCNTs was suspended in 10 mL of concentrated H2SO4and 1 g of KNO3and was then stirred at 300 rpm for 2h by using amagnetic stirreruntil a visually homogeneous black solution formed. Subsequently, 0.5g of KMnO4was slowly added to the solution and further stirred for 2 h at room temperature. The temperature was then gradually increased to 70 °C and maintained at that temperature in a water bath for 2 h (IKA-HS7 digital). When the reaction was complete, the mixtures were removed from the heat source, allowed to cool to room temperature, and poured into 350 g of ice containing 5 mL of 35% H2O2each to prevent precipitation of insoluble MnO2. The mixtures were then centrifuged (24,500 rpm, 30 min) to make the crude GNRs solid (Beckman, Avanti J-25). The solid was removed and then bath-sonicated in 60 mL of deionized (DI) water for 30 min (IKA-HS7 digital). The material was bath-sonicated again by adding 30 mL of HCl, and then the dispersion was centrifuged (24,500 rpm, 30 min). The collected solid was removed and then bath-sonicated in 60 mL of ether for 30 min. Finally, the purified GONRs were obtained by collecting the centrifuged (24,500 rpm, 30 min) solid. The collected solid was oven-dried at 70 °C for 24 h to yield the final GONR product.

The SEM images were produced on JEOL JSM-6500F (accelerating voltage=15 kV). Samples were prepared by pressing as-synthesized samples on copper tape. The TEM images were collected using a Hitachi H-9500 transmission electron microscope. Additional samples were prepared by dispersing as-synthesized samples in ethanol and dropping them onto 300 mesh holey lacy carbon grids on a copper support (Ted Pella, Inc.) under ambient conditions. Raman spectra were obtained using a JASCO NRS-5100 at 532-nm excitation and a Tokyo Instruments Nanofinder 30 at 488-nm excitation. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) spectra were obtained using a ULVAC-PHI PHI 5000 Versaprobe with a microfocused raster-scanned X-ray beam induced by high-energy electrons impinging on Al anodes.

The GONRs obtained by unzipping MWCNTs were dissolved in 1:1 mixed n-butanol and water at 0.001wt% as the precursor. After being fully stirred, the GONR solution was spin-coated on aglass substrate. The spinning was conducted in two stages. The first stage was performed at 400rpm for 5 s to promote uniform GONR distribution on the glass. The second step was performed at 800 rpm for 30 s to yield a relatively thin GONR layer and to evaporate the solvent. After natural drying, some GONR samples were placed on a hotplate at 200 °C for 30min. This thermal treatment could break some of the hydroxyl bonds attached to the GONR to form slightlyreduced GONR. After thermal reduction, a 100-nm-thick Al was deposited on the GONR and rGONR through a shadow mask as the source anddrain electrodes. The device structure for the GONR FET biosensor is depicted inFig. 1(a).Download:Download high-res image (353KB)Download:Download full-size imageFig. 1. (a) Device structure and (b) sensing scheme of the GONR-FET biosensor.

The GNOR FET biosensors were then placed in the MB solution for measurement. Since themolecular weightfor MB is 319.85g mol−1, 9.5955 g of MB was dissolved in the 100 mL de-ionizd (DI) water to prepare MB solution in 0.3 M. This solution was further dilute by DI water to prepare other concentrations. The concentrations of the MB varied from 0.4 to 0.3 M were used. An Ag rod was used as the reference electrode. Before measurement, the Ag rod was immersed in the HCl to produce a stable AgCl electrode. An Agilent B2912 source-meter semiconductor parameter analyzer was connected to the AgCl and source/drain electrodes to obtain electrical measurements. The schematic diagram and the photo picture for the GONR FET biosensor measurement setup is shown inFig. 1(b).

The morphologies of as-produced GONR were characterized by electronic microscope.Fig. 2(a) shows the SEM image of as-produced product with a ribbon-like morphology due to the CNT unzipping. In addition, the TEM image shown inFig. 2(b) further verifies the ribbon-like structure with width in the range of several hundrednanometers. Furthermore, the nearly transparent layer structure revealed by the TEM observation indicates the presence of fewatomic layerswith thickness in the range of several nanometers existed in the as-produced product. The above electronic microscopic study suggests nanoribbon structure was produced in our as-produced sample, which is in consistent with previous reports (Kosynkin et al., 2009,Shimizu et al., 2011). Further structural information of the as-produced GONR can be obtained frommicro Raman spectroscopycharacterization.Fig. 2(d) shows the representative Raman spectra of the pristine CNTs and as-produced GONR. Three bands are present around 1320 cm−1, 1590 cm−1, and 2675 cm−1, which are respectively assigned to the D, G, and 2D bands of carbon materials. The D band can be due to the structural imperfections in the carbonbasal planeor edge site (Ferrari and Robertson, 2000,Malard et al., 2009), whereas the G band is the so-called characteristic peak of graphite, corresponding to the sp2carbon bond stretching of E2g mode (Malard et al., 2009). The 2D band is theovertoneof the D band and is typically used to indicate graphene structure quality (Ferrari et al., 2006,Graf et al., 2007). After the oxidative unzipping process, the intensity of the D and 2D bands increased and decreased, respectively, indicating that defects or theedge effectwas introduced into the as-produced GONR. The defects could have been holes with different shapes and sizes on the basal plane of the ribbon caused by the initial manganate ester formation and the further cleavage of C–C bonding introduced by the vicinal diols (Higginbotham et al., 2010). Moreover, the attached oxygen functional groups (i.e., epoxy, carbonyl, and carboxyl groups) at the edges and surface were also regarded as defects (Higginbotham et al., 2010). Overall, these characterizations suggest that the GONR was successfully prepared using our method.Download:Download high-res image (483KB)Download:Download full-size imageFig. 2.(a) SEM and (b) TEM images of as-producedGONR. and (c)Raman spectraof startingMWCNT(blue lines) and as-producedGONR(red lines). (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article)

The drain current-voltage characteristics of the GONR and rGONR FET biosensors are displayed inFig. 3(a). During the measurement, the source electrode is grounded. And the drain-to-source voltage is swept from 0 to 10V, while thereference voltagewas kept at 10V. The drain current of the GONR and rGONR FET biosensors at 5 V are around 7.3×10−8A and 6.2×10−4A, respectively. The reduction by thermal annealing at 200 °C enhances the drain current by 4 orders of magnitude. They are used as the reference current for MB detection. The MB with a concentration of 0.025 to 0.3 M were measured by rGONR FET biosensors. The drain current increased with the MB concentration. At 5 V, the drain of the rGONR FET biosensor under ambient conditions was 6.2×10−4A and increased to 1.1×10−3A under 0.025 M of MB. Furthermore, it is increased to 7.48×10−3A under 0.3 M of MB. The drain current increased more than 10-fold. The current through the reference electrode remained as low as 1×10−9A, indicating a typical FET type biosensor operation. The applieddrain voltagealso affected the drain current of the rGONR-FET biosensor. The drain current for the rGONR-FET biosensor under 0.3M of MB increased rapidly from 2.61 to 13.7 mA as the drain voltage increased from 5 μV to 10 V. By contrast, the drain current increased less for the rGONR-FET without MB. This indicates the interaction of MB with rGONR will increase conductivity of the rGONR. And this conductivity enhancement is proportional to the concentration of MB. To detect MB at lower concentration, a GONR as a detection channel in a FET biosensor is expected. As shown in the Fig. (a), the GONR-FET biosensor was used to detect MB at concentration from 0.8 to 3 mM. As a result, the GONR FET biosensor can detect MB at much lower concentration. The drain current is 4.4×10−5A for a GONR-FET to sense 0.8 mM of MB at 5 V drain voltage. Notably, the interaction of the MB and rGONR is irreversible. After the sensing of 0.3 M of MB, the drain current of the rGONR-FET biosensor was measured again under air and DI water. The current–voltage characteristics are shown inFig. 3(b). The three curves almost coinciding indicate a possible electrochemical interaction between the MB and rGONR. A similar effect was previously found in CNT, in which the MB was positively charged and interacted with CNT through charge transfer to form an electrochemically functional MB–CNTnanostructure(Yan et al., 2005). This effect may have been applied to the MB sensing by the GONR. In this work, the charge transfer may cause the GONR reduced chemically thereby increasing the conductivity of the GONR. And, this conductivity increasing is expected to last for a long time. They are invariant either in the air or in the DI water.Download:Download high-res image (514KB)Download:Download full-size imageFig. 3.(a) The drain current–voltage output characteristics for the rGONR- and GONR-FET biosensor. The concentration of methylene blue (MB) is varied from 0.025–0.3M was used for detection in a rGONRFET. And the concentration of MB is varied from 0.8 to 3mM for detection in a rGONRFET. (b) The drain current-voltage output characteristics for rGONR FET biosensor that immersed in 0.3M of MB, immersed in theDI waterand blow-dry and measured in the air, respectively. The drain sensing current is invaried.

The sensitivity of the rGONR and GONR FET biosensors are determined by the ratio of current change to concentration change in the MB. The drain current at 5 μV, 3 V, and 5 V drain voltage regarding MB concentration is shown inFig. 4(a) and (b) for rGONR FET and GONR FET, respectively. The calculated sensitivity for the rGONR FET at 5-μV, 3-V, and 5-V drain voltage was 7.8, 16.5, and 28.9 μA/mM, respectively. With lower concentration of MB on GONR-FET, the sensitivity is slightly reduced. The calculated sensitivity for GONR FET at 5-μV, 3-V, and 5-V drain voltage was 2.7, 7.8, and 12.5 μA/mM, respectively. The possible detection limit for this FET biosensor can be extrapolated by the line along the sensitivity curve with the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) of 10. Since the reference drain current of GONR FET biosensor with at 5 V is 7.3×10−8A, we could set 7.3×10−8A as the detection limit. This limit is estimated around 4.7nM. However, this limit need further confirmation, because biosensor usually follow Langmuir-Hill behavior in which the signal is insensitive to very small amount of biomaterials. This result is superior to those of other methods. For example, the opticalexcitation spectrumcan detect the 313-μM MB in the photoreduction experiment (Kadokawa et al., 2011).Cyclic voltammetryand amperometric measurements have a detection limit of 1μM forhydrogen peroxidedetection when MB is used as the coimmobilization agent on the CNT electrode (Xu et al., 2003).Download:Download high-res image (500KB)Download:Download full-size imageFig. 4.(a) The semi-logarithm plot of the detection current of a rGONR FET biosensor along with MB concentration for differentdrain voltage(5μV, 3 V and 5 V). The sensitivity is calculated as 7.8 μA/mM, 16.5 μA/mM and 28.9 μA/mM, respectively. (b) The logarithm plot of the detection current of a GONR FET biosensor along with MB concentration for different drain voltage (5 μV, 3 V and 5 V). The sensitivity is calculated as 2.7 μA/mM, 7.8 μA/mM and 12.5 μA/mM, respectively. Consider the signal-to-noise (SNR) of 10, the detection limit is estimated by extrapolate plot to as 4.7 nM of MB.

The interaction of the MB to the rGONR was studied throughRaman spectroscopyand XPS. The normalized Raman spectroscopy of the rGONR after immersion in the MB sensing with different concentrations is shown inFig. 5(a). The D (1336 cm−1), G (1592 cm−1), and 2D (2659 cm−1) peaks for the graphene are clearly visible. The extensive D peak is due to structural imperfections caused by the presence of oxygen-related functional groups. The G peak is the characteristic peak of graphite, corresponding to the sp2carbon bond-stretching mode. The 2D band is the overtone of the D band and is typically used to indicate graphene film quality, as discussed inSection 3.1. When the D peaks were normalized to unity for all samples, the intensity of the 2D peaks increased gradually with MB concentration.Fig. 5(b) displays the intensity of the 2D peak to the G peak (I2D/IG) and of the 2D peak to the D peak (I2D/ID) in terms of MB concentration. The 2D–G ratio increased from 0.23 for the nontreated rGONR to 0.52 for the rGONR immersed in the 0.3 M MB. The increased I2D–IGintensity ratio revealed that the quality of the rGONR was improved by the MB. The 2D band was found to be enhanced with respect to the D band, suggesting that the MB treatment increased the sp2graphene domain size in the rGONR. According to the layer quality improvement and average rGONR domain size increase after MB treatment, we might suggest that the MB plays a vital role in the reduction and recovery of the graphene. This suggests that during charge transfer, part of the MB in the solution takes away one type of functional group to further rGONR reduction. To understand which type of the functional group was taken away, XPS was performed on the GONR and GONR immersed in the MB at different concentrations (0.1 and 0.3 M). The C1s peak in the XPS for GONR, GONR with 0.1-M MB treatment, and GONR with 0.3-M MB treatment are shown inFig. 6(a)–(c), respectively. In the figure, the C1s peak is deconvoluted into C=C, C–O, C=O, and O–C=O bonds. The C–O bond was substantially reduced after MB treatment, indicating that the MB tends to take the hydroxyl (OH−) group away from GONR. This is revealed by the atomic concentration for each bond listed inTable 1. The GONR had 61.2% of the C–C bond and 28.9% of the C–O bond. The total proportions of the C=O and O–C=O bonds were approximately 10%. After 0.3-M MB treatment, the C–C bond proportion had increased to 71%, whereas the C–O bond proportion had decreased to 17.2%. The total amount of the C=O and O–C=O proportions remained approximately 11.5%. The XPS results revealed a reduction in the oxygen functional groups and an increase in the C–C bond. These results are consistent with our Raman spectrum finding and suggestion that the MB takes the OH−group away, leaving GONR with an enlarged graphene domain. According to XPS and Raman results, the chemical reaction between MB and GONR and rGONR can be suggested. Methylene blue is a reductive chemical and is positively charged. The positive charge may transfer to the GONR in the solution cause the charge in-neutrality. This in-neutrality may be compensated by releasing •OH groups into the solution. As a consequence, the GONR is reduced. Although this process need to be verified and may contain other possibility, the results of GONR reduction after •OH releasing and the increased in graphene domain by C bond reconstruction is confirmed experimentally.Download:Download high-res image (432KB)Download:Download full-size imageFig. 5.(a) TheRaman spectraand (b) the I2D/IGand I2D/IDof the GONR after MB immersion with different concentrations.Download:Download high-res image (799KB)Download:Download full-size imageFig. 6.TheXPSC1s peaks for (a) pristine GONR and (b) 0.1M and (c) 0.3 M MB immersed GONR.Table 1. The atomic concentration for C–C, C–O, C=O and O–C=O bondings in the XPS C1s peak of GONR after methylene blue immersion.SamplesC–C (at%)C–O (at%)C=O (at%)O–C=O (at%)GONR61.228.67.13.10.1 M MB Treated GONR64.920.86.77.40.3 M MB Treated GONR71.117.25.75.8

Our preliminary work demonstrates a FET type biosensor based on graphene oxide nanoribbon (GONR) for methylene blue detection. The GONRs are obtained by unzipping MWCNTs in acid. By using rGONR FET biosensor, the sensing current as high as 7.48 mA was obtained for 0.3 M of MB detection. Even with 0.8 mM of MB, the sensing current is still as high as 44 μA. As a result, MB has extensive reaction with GONR. By calculation, the highest sensitivity at 5 V is 28.9 μA/mM on rGONR-FET biosensor. With GONR-FET biosensor, the sensitivity reduced to 12.5 μA/mM. The sensing mechanism is attributable to the increase in the conduction of the GONR after immersion in the MB. The Raman spectra for rGONR after MB sensing suggest the structural imperfection of rGONR is improved and the sp2graphene domain is enlarged by the enhanced 2D peaks respect to D and G peaks. Furthermore, some of the oxygen-related imperfections, especially hydroxyl groups (•OH), was removed by the MB suggesting by the XPS spectra. According to XPS and Raman, the positive charge is proposed to transfer from MB to GONR during sensing. This transfer causes charge in-neutrality in the GONR which is compensated by releasing •OH functional groups. Overall, the GONR-FET biosensor exhibited high sensitivity and a low detection limit that is highly suitable for detecting low concentrations of biomaterials.

This work is financially supported byMinistry of Science and Technology (MOST), Taiwan under Grant nos. MOST104-2221-E-005-074-, MOST103-2221-E-011-150-MY2, and MOST104-2923-E-011-001-MY3.

A review on nanostructure-based mercury (II) detection and monitoring focusing on aptamer and oligonucleotide biosensors2020, TalantaShow abstractHeavy metal ion pollution is a severe problem in environmental protection and especially in human health due to their bioaccumulation in organisms. Mercury (II) (Hg2+), even at low concentrations, can lead to DNA damage and give permanent harm to the central nervous system by easily passing through biological membranes. Therefore, sensitive detection and monitoring of Hg2+is of particular interest with significant specificity. In this review, aptamer-based strategies in combination with nanostructures as well as several other strategies to solve addressed problems in sensor development for Hg2+are discussed in detail. In particular, the analytical performance of different aptamer and oligonucleotide-based strategies using different signal improvement approaches based on nanoparticles were compared within each strategy and in between. Although quite a number of the suggested methodologies analyzed in this review fulfills the standard requirements, further development is still needed on real sample analysis and analytical performance parameters.Magnetic and thermodynamic characteristics of a rectangle Ising nanoribbon2020, Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its ApplicationsShow abstractUsing Monte Carlo simulation, we investigated magnetic and thermodynamic characteristics of the rectangle core–shell ferrimagnetic mixed-spin (3/2, 2) Ising nanoribbon under the effects of sublattice crystal field, exchange coupling and temperature. Typical temperature dependence of the total magnetization, the core and shell magnetization, the susceptibility and the internal energy for several fixed values of Hamiltonian parameters were discussed in detail. The phase diagrams of the critical and compensation temperatures were presented in various Hamiltonian parameter planes. In addition, particular emphasis was given to the interesting multi-cycle hysteresis behaviors of the total system and sublattices. Our results show reasonable consistency compared with many previous theoretical and experimental studies.Graphene nanoribbons in electrochemical sensors and biosensors: A review2018, International Journal of Electrochemical ScienceShow abstractRecently, graphene nanoribbons (GNRs) are narrow strips of graphene sheets with width in nanometers (<50 nm) and they are becoming attractive material in a variety of electrochemical applications owing to their outstanding electronic and catalytic properties. The most fascinating property of GNRs that distinguish them from other members of graphene family is their higher area-normalized edge-plane structures. In addition, GNRs have large surface area, high conductivity, residual oxygen functionalities, and accessible sites for catalysis, biocompatibility and good stability. Therefore, GNRs based nanomaterials are recently getting much popularity in electrochemically sensing and biosensing applications. In this review, we are presenting a summary of recent reports on GNRs based nanomaterials for electrochemical sensors and biosensors.Organic Bioelectronic Devices for Metabolite Sensing2022, Chemical ReviewsCore-shell heterostructured multiwalled carbon nanotubes@reduced graphene oxide nanoribbons/chitosan, a robust nanobiocomposite for enzymatic biosensing of hydrogen peroxide and nitrite2017, Scientific ReportsField-Effect Biosensors for On-Site Detection: Recent Advances and Promising Targets2017, Advanced Healthcare MaterialsView all citing articles on Scopus

A review on nanostructure-based mercury (II) detection and monitoring focusing on aptamer and oligonucleotide biosensors2020, Talanta

Heavy metal ion pollution is a severe problem in environmental protection and especially in human health due to their bioaccumulation in organisms. Mercury (II) (Hg2+), even at low concentrations, can lead to DNA damage and give permanent harm to the central nervous system by easily passing through biological membranes. Therefore, sensitive detection and monitoring of Hg2+is of particular interest with significant specificity. In this review, aptamer-based strategies in combination with nanostructures as well as several other strategies to solve addressed problems in sensor development for Hg2+are discussed in detail. In particular, the analytical performance of different aptamer and oligonucleotide-based strategies using different signal improvement approaches based on nanoparticles were compared within each strategy and in between. Although quite a number of the suggested methodologies analyzed in this review fulfills the standard requirements, further development is still needed on real sample analysis and analytical performance parameters.

Magnetic and thermodynamic characteristics of a rectangle Ising nanoribbon2020, Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications

Using Monte Carlo simulation, we investigated magnetic and thermodynamic characteristics of the rectangle core–shell ferrimagnetic mixed-spin (3/2, 2) Ising nanoribbon under the effects of sublattice crystal field, exchange coupling and temperature. Typical temperature dependence of the total magnetization, the core and shell magnetization, the susceptibility and the internal energy for several fixed values of Hamiltonian parameters were discussed in detail. The phase diagrams of the critical and compensation temperatures were presented in various Hamiltonian parameter planes. In addition, particular emphasis was given to the interesting multi-cycle hysteresis behaviors of the total system and sublattices. Our results show reasonable consistency compared with many previous theoretical and experimental studies.

Graphene nanoribbons in electrochemical sensors and biosensors: A review2018, International Journal of Electrochemical Science

Recently, graphene nanoribbons (GNRs) are narrow strips of graphene sheets with width in nanometers (<50 nm) and they are becoming attractive material in a variety of electrochemical applications owing to their outstanding electronic and catalytic properties. The most fascinating property of GNRs that distinguish them from other members of graphene family is their higher area-normalized edge-plane structures. In addition, GNRs have large surface area, high conductivity, residual oxygen functionalities, and accessible sites for catalysis, biocompatibility and good stability. Therefore, GNRs based nanomaterials are recently getting much popularity in electrochemically sensing and biosensing applications. In this review, we are presenting a summary of recent reports on GNRs based nanomaterials for electrochemical sensors and biosensors.

Organic Bioelectronic Devices for Metabolite Sensing2022, Chemical Reviews

Core-shell heterostructured multiwalled carbon nanotubes@reduced graphene oxide nanoribbons/chitosan, a robust nanobiocomposite for enzymatic biosensing of hydrogen peroxide and nitrite2017, Scientific Reports

Field-Effect Biosensors for On-Site Detection: Recent Advances and Promising Targets2017, Advanced Healthcare Materials

2D Materials in Biosensors & BioelectronicsEdited byAshutoshTiwariDownload full issue

2D Materials in Biosensors & BioelectronicsEdited byAshutoshTiwari

Edited byAshutoshTiwari

No articles found.

View details