A Flexible, Transparent Chemosensor Integrating an Inkjet-Printed Organic Field-Effect Transistor and a Non-Covalently Functionalized Graphene Electrode
Stefano Lai, Ylea Vlamidis, Neeraj Mishra, Piero Cosseddu, Vaidotas Mišeikis, Pier Carlo Ricci, Valerio Voliani, Camilla Coletti, Annalisa Bonfiglio
First published: 04 August 2021 https://doi.org/10.1002/admt.202100481Citations: 3
Find It at UChicago
SectionsPDFTools Share
Abstract
This paper presents a novel chemical sensor that combines an organic, floating gate field-effect transistor and a functional graphene electrode, aimed at realizing the basic building block for novel biomedical sensor systems. A non-covalent functionalization of graphene with sensing peptides bearing a pyrene moiety is described as a way to provide graphene with chemical responsivity without affecting its electronic and optical features. Given the special properties of the materials and technologies used, and the intrinsic multi-modality of the active device, it is possible to develop a complete range of chemosensing devices by varying the chemical specificity of the immobilized receptor. The devices are fully flexible, highly transparent, and can be completely fabricated into large areas using cost-effective and industrially relevant techniques. A complete electrical characterization of the fabricated devices is reported, and their successful use as pH sensors is described as a representative example for demonstrating their sensing capability.

1 Introduction
Biochemical sensors have revolutionized several biomedical tests since their first introduction in the late Fifties. With the aim of designing devices with increased reliability, sensitivity, portability, ease of use, and affordability, biochemical sensors are increasingly benefiting from the development of electronic technologies. In particular, the application of field-effect transistors (FETs) for biochemical sensing has attracted the attention of scientists since the demonstration of the ion-sensitive FET (ISFET) functionality.[1] FETs are capable of direct, label-free transduction of biochemical signals into electrical quantities and provide a local amplification that simplifies signal acquisition and processing. In addition, the specific properties of electronic technologies make this class of sensors ideal for the development of integrated, portable, user-friendly and affordable sensing systems. As FET-based biochemical sensors (namely bioFETs or chemFETs) are successfully used for broad biochemical sensing applications,[2-4] research has focused on providing these devices with novel properties that incorporate innovations of electronic technologies and materials science. In particular, mechanical flexibility and optical transparency are important for advanced biosensing devices. Mechanical flexibility ensures the possibility of adapting devices to complex shapes, and this property is fundamental to the development of new classes of Lab-on-a-Chip devices,[5-7] and more so for Point-of-Care, wearable,[8-10] or even implantable instrumentation.[11] Optical transparency is also crucial for device integration with wearable elements,[12] as well as when the integration of electronic and optical characterization is fundamental, such as in cell culturing or in medical applications, where optical inspection of analytes is fundamental.[13, 14]

In this sense, graphene and its derivatives have attracted the interest of the scientific community, because of their electrical properties, mechanical flexibility, robustness, durability, and transparency. Moreover, several studies have confirmed the biocompatibility and low cytotoxicity of graphene derivatives,[15] which makes them extremely attractive for biosensing applications. With respect to other conductive materials, graphene is highly stable and can be deposited by means of large-area processes, even by solution process techniques. State-of-the-art, graphene-based bio-, and chemFETs have been reported for several applications, ranging from pH[16-18] and chemical species[19-21] measurements, to genetic,[22-25] enzymatic,[26-29] and immunological[30-32] analyses.

Despite the promising results, existing graphene-based devices still share fundamental limitation with ISFET-based structures, thus dramatically limiting the advantages related to the employment of this material. In particular, the need for a reference electrode in solution severely limits the actual integration and portability of sensors. Moreover, graphene-based FET sensors typically have poor switching capability because of the high turn-off current, which is a limitation for final integration with electronic readout blocks.

In this paper, the integration of graphene functional electrodes with an organic floating-gate FET structure, called organic charge-modulated FET (OCMFET), is proposed. In this approach, the graphene electrode is used as sensing element, modified with a non-covalent functionalization that produces the desired biochemical sensitivity. Electronic transduction is instead performed by the organic FET, and this allows skipping the poor field-effect performances of graphene used as active layer. In addition, the particular working principle of the OCMFET[33] avoids the presence of a reference electrode and prevents the exposure of the organic semiconductor to the measurement environment, thus ensuring the stability of its electrical performances. Interestingly, several organic electronic materials share the same peculiar mechanical and optical properties of graphene, thus being suitable for the development of flexible and transparent devices. Indeed, the entire device structure here proposed is fabricated of flexible and transparent plastic substrates employing highly transparent organic active materials, further characterized by a high degree of flexibility,[34-36] thus allowing the fabrication of fully flexible devices. Moreover, large-area, cost-effective, and industrial grade techniques, namely chemical vapour deposition (CVD) and inkjet printing, were employed to ensure the industrial scalability of the future device fabrication process. Fabricated devices have been electrically and optically characterized, thus demonstrating their valuable electrical performances and high degree of transparency. Finally, pH sensing capability was considered a relevant benchmark. The chemosensitivity was varied by simply changing the custom-synthesized pyrenate peptide chemoreceptors immobilized on the graphene floating gate, and this allowed exploring the device functionalities in different measurement conditions.

2 Results and Discussion
2.1 Graphene Production and Characterization
Graphene is grown using CVD and was routinely characterized as previously reported elsewhere.[37] Raman mapping was performed after the transfer of graphene onto the PET substrates to assess the coverage and adhesion. Full analysis of the Raman signature of graphene on PET was hindered by the convolution of the graphene G-peak near 1590 cm−1 with a strong PET peak at ≈1613 cm−1. Alternatively, the absence of PET Raman spectral features between 1750 and 2800 cm2 unequivocally verified the presence of graphene by mapping the intensity and width of the graphene 2D peak at ≈2680 cm−2. The negligible intensity of the graphene D peak at 1350 cm−1 indicates the few lattice defects in the transferred graphene.[38] A representative spectrum from the map is shown in Figure 1a, as the blue curve. The black curve shows the spectrum of the graphene, obtained by subtracting the PET background (red curve), revealing a typical graphene spectrum with 2 prominent peaks near ≈1593 cm−1 (G peak) and ≈2685 cm−1 (2D peak). The 2D peak has a full-width-at-half-maximum (FWHM) ≈26 cm−1 and can be fitted with a single Lorentzian component (Figure S1, Supporting Information), indicating that the graphene is monolayer,[39] which is expected for CVD graphene synthesized on Cu foil due to mostly self-limiting nature of the growth.[40] The absence of the D peak near 1350 cm−1 indicates a negligible amount of lattice defects in the transferred graphene,[38] whereas the positions of the G peak (≈1593 cm−1) and 2D-peak (≈2685 cm−1) along with peak intensity ratio I(2D)/I(G) ≈2 indicate ≈5 × 1012 cm−2 doping,[41] consistent with wet-transferred graphene.[42] The average 2D peak FWHM of ≈26 cm−1 indicates a relatively low level of strain fluctuations induced by the polymeric substrate.[43] The 2D FWHM histogram of the whole map is shown in Figure 1b.

Details are in the caption following the image
Figure 1
Open in figure viewer
PowerPoint
a) Raman spectra of graphene (5× magnification, black), of PET substrate (red) and graphene transferred on PET substrate (blue); b) 2D full-width-at-half-maximum histogram of the whole map.
2.2 Graphene Modification
Pyrene-modified peptides were produced and characterized by standard techniques.[44] Peptides are comprised of two main domains (Figure 2a): i) a charge sensitive area and ii) an anchoring point. The charge sensitive area is related to the primary structure of the peptide and is a result of the lateral group of lysine (K) or glutamate (E). Here, K has a pK of 10.54, while E has a pK of 4.07. Thus, K is neutral at basic pH and positive at neutral/acidic pH while E is negative at neutral/basic pH and neutral at acidic pH. The anchoring point is the pyrene group, which strongly interacts with graphene via π-stacking ﻿without perturbing the sp2 bond structure of the lattice or its electronic properties.[45] The conditions employed (pyrene-peptide concentration and solvent) for the graphene functionalization were chosen to obtain satisfactory decoration of the sensing gate. Figure 2b displays the solid-state Raman characterization of pyEK, together with the band assignment. To better characterize the molecule, a few mg of freeze-dried peptide was stuck onto adhesive carbon tape and the Raman spectrum was acquired using a laser excitation of 785 nm, in order to suppress the background fluorescence. The spectrum shows the typical pyrene distinctive bands at ≈418, 596, 1076, 1243, 1404, 1599, 1608, and 1634 cm−1, confirming the success of the conjugation between the peptide and the pyrene group. At wavenumbers less than 800 cm−1, skeletal stretching, and deformation vibrations occur, whereas in the wavenumber range of 1060–1405 cm−1, CH in-plane bending and CC stretching occurs. The peaks at 1599, 1608, and 1634 cm−1 are assigned to aromatic CC stretching vibration.[46] The Raman spectrum of the functionalized graphene surface is shown in Figure 2c. After the functionalization with the pyrene-modified peptides, the graphene floating gate is still uniform, as suggested by the lack of a visible D band in the Raman spectrum. The features in the spectrum are the same as observed in Figure 1a, blue line, ascribable to both the substrate and graphene; alternatively, the functionalization of graphene is confirmed by the high background level caused by the pyrene fluorescence, whereas the bands at 1295, 1410, 1690, and 1726 cm−1 are because of the PET substrate.

Details are in the caption following the image
Figure 2
Open in figure viewer
PowerPoint
a) Schematic showing the structure of synthesized molecules and functionalization; b) solid-state Raman characterization of pyEK, with band assignments; c) Raman spectrum of the functionalized graphene surface.
2.3 Device Optical Characterization
Figure 3 illustrates the OCMFET structure; details about the complete fabrication process are reported in the Experimental Section. Briefly, the patterned graphene electrode acts as floating gate, and it is partially insulated with a layer of Parylene C. The device structure is then completed by poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):polystyrene sulfonate (PEDOT:PSS) electrodes (source, drain, and gate) and the organic semiconductor, namely 6,13-Bis(triisopropylsilylethynyl)pentacene (TIPS pentacene). Different stackings of materials are thus obtained.

Details are in the caption following the image
Figure 3
Open in figure viewer
PowerPoint
3D and 2D device structure, indicating employed materials.
Figure 4 shows the absorption spectrum in the UV–vis range acquired in different areas of the device. The part of the sensor with the maximum absorption is represented by the transistor, and it is related to the TIPS pentacene layer and the typical absorption peaks reported for this semiconductor (600, 650, and 700 nm[47-49]). Noticeably, the absorption does not exceed 16% of the impinging radiation, demonstrating the overall transparency of the device. Additionally, if the area of the control capacitor is considered (where the full stacking of the materials is separated from the semiconductor), the absorbance does not exceed 6% of the impinging light, that is, more than the 90% of visible light is transmitted (see the inset). Interestingly, the same level is obtained on a bare PET substrate. Therefore, the fabricated devices show a high degree of transparency, which could be even improved with the employment of different (more transparent) semiconductor materials.

Details are in the caption following the image
Figure 4
Open in figure viewer
PowerPoint
Absorption spectra of PET (red), PET+Graphene+Parylene C+PEDOT:PSS (green) and PET+Graphene+Parylene C+PEDOT:PSS+TIPS Pentacene (blue). In the inset, corresponding transmission is reported.
2.4 Sensor Characterization
The fabricated OCMFETs were first tested as transistors to characterize their electronic functionality. Figure 5 reports typical output and transfer characteristic curves of the fabricated devices. Sensors can operate at low voltages (not exceeding 5 V in absolute value), with ideal transistor features: field effect and current saturation are well represented in the output characteristics (Figure 5a), and negligible hysteresis and a low leakage current (IGS) are represented in the transfer characteristics (Figure 5b). This last aspect is crucial for the sensor functionality: as the IGS flows from the source to control gate through the floating gate, its restrained value ensures that the floating gate itself is actually insulated from other electrical contacts. Ten identical devices were fabricated and tested, and basic electrical parameters were extracted by the square-root of the transfer characteristic curve using well-known procedures:[50]the average threshold voltage was 1.5 ± 0.5 V, and the charge carrier mobility was (3.9 ± 0.6)·10−2 cm2 V−1 s−1.

Details are in the caption following the image
Figure 5
Open in figure viewer
PowerPoint
a) Typical output and b) transfer characteristic curves (in saturation regime) of fabricated OCMFETs.
A complete characterization of the device as a pH sensor was then performed. A pH evaluation is a standard benchmark for biochemical sensors, having several applications in environmental control, food quality evaluation, and biomedical applications. Figure S2, Supporting Information briefly reports the basic working principle of the OCMFET, which is thoroughly described elsewhere.[33] The device acts as a charge sensor, as the modulation of the charge in the exposed portion of the floating gate (the sensing area) determines a modulation of the charge distribution inside the floating gate. As a result, the charge carrier density in the OFET channel is perturbated, leading to a shift in the device threshold voltage (ΔVTH) according to the following relationship,
(1)
where ΔQ is the charge modulation on the sensing area, and CSUM is the sum of all capacitances insisting on floating gate. In the hypothesis of a complete induction, a charge Q induces an opposite charge -Q in the channel of the transistor. In the case of p-type devices, a positive charge on the sensing area induces negative charge in the channel, thus inducing a more negative threshold voltage (the device is switched off). Alternatively, a negative charge in the sensing area determines an accumulation of holes in the transistor channel, inducing a shift of the threshold voltage toward more positive values (the device is switched on).
Figures 6, 7, and 8 report the characterization of the device response at different pH values, using the molecules pyK, pyE, and pyEK whose synthesis is described in the Experimental section. These pyrenate peptides have been designed to evaluate responsivity of devices at different pH conditions. Indeed, pyK hosts only lysine molecules, thus being suited for showing a net charge variation only in a basic environment. Similarly, pyE hosts only glutamate molecules, which conversely show a net charge variation in acidic conditions.

Details are in the caption following the image
Figure 6
Open in figure viewer
PowerPoint
a) Threshold voltage shift for a pyK-functionalized OCMFET upon pH modulation in the measurement environment: threshold voltage shift is ΔVTH,i = VTH,pHi-VTH,pH3, where pyK is neutral at this pH value; the net charge of the molecule is reported on the right y–axis for comparison with ΔVTH. b) Average threshold voltage shift recorded in independent experiments carried out on two different sensors in their dynamic range pH = [6,12].
Details are in the caption following the image
Figure 7
Open in figure viewer
PowerPoint
a) Threshold voltage shift for a pyE-functionalized OCMFET upon pH modulation in the measurement environment: threshold voltage shift is ΔVTH,i = VTH,pHi-VTH,pH12, where pyE is neutral at this pH value; the net charge of the molecule is reported on the right y–axis for comparison with ΔVTH. b) Average threshold voltage shift recorded in independent experiments carried out on two different sensors in their dynamic range pH = [3,7].
Details are in the caption following the image
Figure 8
Open in figure viewer
PowerPoint
a) Threshold voltage shift for a pyEK-functionalized OCMFET upon double-sweep pH modulation in the measurement environment (full symbols for pH modulation from 3 to 12, open symbols for pH modulation from 12 to 3): threshold voltage shift is ΔVTH,i = VTH,pHi-VTH,pH5, where pyEK is neutral at this pH value; the net charge of the molecule is reported on the right y–axis for comparison with ΔVTH. b) Average threshold voltage shift recorded in independent experiments carried out on two different sensors.
Figure 6 reports the characterization of devices functionalized with pyK. As shown by the net charge of the molecule shown in the right axis of Figure 6a, the molecule has a net positive charge which progressively decreases as soon as the pH exceeds the neutral value. The plot reports the threshold voltage variation, ΔVTH = VTH,i-VTH,12, where VTH,i is the value of the threshold voltage at a specific pH value i, and VTH,12 is the threshold voltage value recorded at the pH value of 12, where the molecule is neutral (net charge zero). The square root of the transfer characteristics used for threshold voltage extrapolation is reported in Figure S3, Supporting Information. At low pH values, the net charge of the molecule is positive. According to the working principle of the OCMFET, this induces negative charges in the channel of the transistor, determining a switch off (the threshold voltage becomes more negative). Therefore, in an acidic environment, ΔVTH has the lowest (most negative) value. As the pH increases, the net charge of the molecule decreases (i.e. becomes more negative), thus the threshold voltage becomes more positive, and ΔVTH increases. The dynamic range of the sensor is comprised between pH = 8 and pH = 12; ΔVTH in this range is reproducible over independent experiments carried out on different devices, as shown in Figure 6b. Notably, the trend of ΔVTH precisely reproduces the variations of the net charge in the molecule, with minimum fluctuations related to noise or the fitting error in the extrapolation of the threshold voltage values.

The characterization in acidic environment, obtained by functionalizing the sensing area with the molecule pyE (that hosts only glutamate groups) is shown in Figure 7. As reported on the right axis of Figure 7a, the molecule is neutral only in a strongly acidic environment, while it sharply becomes negative for higher pH values, with a plateau reached at pH 7. In this case, ΔVTH = VTH,i-VTH,3, where VTH,3 is the value of the threshold voltage at pH 3, when the molecule is neutral. As the pH increases and the molecules get an increasing negative charge, positive charge carriers are collected inside the OFET channel. As a result, the threshold voltage becomes more positive, and so does the ΔVTH. The ΔVTH changes are in good agreement with the variation of the net charge, reaching a plateau at pH 7. The dynamic range is comprised between pH = 3 and pH = 7; in this span, ΔVTH recorded in independent experiments over different devices is well reproducible, as shown in Figure 7b. Additionally, fluctuations can be ascribed to noise sources in the setup and threshold voltage extrapolation. The square root of transfer characteristics used for the threshold voltage extrapolation in Figure 7a is reported in Figure S4, Supporting Information.

Figure 8 finally reports the response of a device functionalized with the molecule pyEK. This peptide was designed to obtain a more complex charge profile variation with pH, as it hosts both lysine and glutamate groups. Indeed, the molecules are positively charged at acid pH, and negatively charged in a basic environment. The molecule is neutral for pH 5, while a plateau at a net charge—1 is reported between pH 6 and pH 8 because pyEK has four glutamate groups and three lysine groups, resulting in an unbalanced net charge toward negative values (as shown in the right axis of Figure 8a). The response of the sensor, shown in the left axis as ΔVTH = VTH,i-VTH,5, was acquired by scanning pH values from acidic to basic (solid symbols) and backward (open symbols) to demonstrate the reproducibility of the sensor response and its reversibility. A good reproducibility was also observed in different, independent experiments carried out on different devices, as shown in Figure 8b. When pH < 5, the molecule is positively charged, so the sensor has a threshold voltage VTH,i<VTH,5 and ΔVTH is negative. When 5 < pH < 8, the charge is constant at −1, so VTH,i>VTH,5, and ΔVTH is slightly positive. When pH exceeds 8, the negative charge sharply increases, and so ΔVTH. In the reverse scan, the sensor response is coherent with what described: ΔVTH progressively decreases with pH. Although some hysteresis is noticed in the response, in particular in acidic environment, a good reversibility of the sensor response was demonstrated. Figure S5, Supporting Information shows the square-root of the transfer characteristic curves recorded during the described experiments.

3 Conclusion
A novel, transparent FET-based biochemical sensor fabricated on a flexible substrate has been here presented. For the first time, the OCMFET working principle was employed in combination of graphene (for the sensing electrode) and transparent organic materials to fabricate devices with a very high degree of transparency. The use of large-area techniques such as inkjet printing and CVD, makes the whole fabrication process cost-effective and scalable to an industrial size. Complete characterization of the non-covalent functionalization of graphene with pyrene-based molecules demonstrated that graphene can be effectively transferred to plastic substrates and modified with biochemical receptors, with negligible loss in terms of electrical and optical properties. The electrical functionality of the OCMFET was characterized, and its ability to operate at low voltages with ideal transistor characteristics was demonstrated. Finally, the sensors functionality was demonstrated using custom-synthesized pyrenate peptides conceived for their characterization in different pH conditions. By selecting the characteristics of the chemical receptor, the device clearly discriminates pH values in acidic and basic environments, and shows good reproducibility and reversibility of the response. Therefore, the unique combination of transparency and flexibility makes this class of sensors suitable for the application in LoC and PoC testing, such as, for instance, for evaluating cellular metabolism in cultures or monitoring skin pH in a wearable system, taking particular advantage of transparency that is a particularly desirable feature for cell biosensors. The straightforward synthesis of chemo-receptor groups would easily allow the development of pH sensors with sensing range tailored for specific employments, such as the monitoring of acidification processes in physiological conditions for biomedical applications. Moreover, as the possibility of a simple functionalization method for the graphene floating electrode has been demonstrated, the proposed approach could be reasonably extended to different types of biochemical analyses by modifying the receptor immobilized on the graphene surface. This paves the way for the development of a new class of high-performance devices that take full advantage of graphene as a material that is highly conductive, optically transparent, and, most importantly, very versatile for chemical functionalization.

4 Experimental Section
Graphene Synthesis, Transfer, and Patterning
Graphene was produced using an Aixtron BM Pro cold-wall reactor on electro-polished Cu foil (purity 99.8%, Alfa-Aesar) as previously reported.[37] To promote uniform growth of polycrystalline graphene, copper foils were first annealed in argon for 10 min to reduce the surface roughness and increase the Cu grain size. The graphene was grown between 1020 and 1040  °C and a pressure of 25 mbar. Methane and hydrogen were introduced into the reactor with typical gas flow rates of 2 sccm for methane, 20 sccm for hydrogen, and 980 sccm for argon for 30 min. The sample was cooled to room temperature under the flow of argon. The resulting average graphene domain size was 20–30 µm.

The transfer of single-layer graphene (SLG) on a PET substrate was performed using the standard wet etching technique.[34, 40] A 200 nm layer of poly-methyl-methacrylate (PMMA) was spin coated on the SLG/Cu foil and baked for 1 min at 90  °C. The graphene grown on the backside of the Cu foil was removed by reactive ion etching (RIE). The Cu was etched overnight using a 0.1 m solution of ammonium persulfate.[51] The membrane was repeatedly rinsed in deionised water to remove residuals of the Cu etchant and was then transferred onto a PET substrate that was previously cleaned with acetone and isopropanol and treated with oxygen plasma for 5 min at 100 W. When completely dried, the sample was stored in acetone for at least 2 h to remove the PMMA, rinsed with isopropanol, and annealed at 150 °C for 3 h on a hotplate. After the transfer was completed, graphene was shaped into the electrode geometry by optical lithography (using Shipley S1813 photoresist) and RIE. All the chemicals were purchased from Sigma Aldrich unless otherwise specified. All chemicals were used as received. All of the solutions were prepared using Milli-Q water (Milli-Q, Millipore, 18.2-MΩ resistivity).

Device Fabrication
The patterned graphene electrode was used as floating gate in the OCMFET structure (see Figure 3). The electrode was insulated from the upper contacts (source, drain, and control gate) using a 250 nm-thick Parylene C film, deposited by using a PDS Labcoater 2 Chemical Vapour Deposition unit (Specialty Coating Systems). An adhesion promoter (A-174 Sylane, Specialty Coating System) was employed to ensure ideal deposition of the dielectric film on the electrode. To prevent contamination with Parylene C during the deposition, a thin film of polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS, Sylgard 184, Dow Corning) was laminated onto the part of the floating gate that will host the receptor layer, namely the sensing area of the device. To ensure the overall transparency of the device, the remaining electrodes (source, drain, and control gate) were deposited by inkjet printing using a DMP 2831 system (Fujifilm Dimatix) and a commercially available ink (PJet HC, Heraeus) based on poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):polystyrene sulfonate (PEDOT:PSS). The channel area of the transistor has an interdigitated pattern, comprised of nine alternating, 100 µm-thick source and drain electrodes. The electrodes were printed at 60 °C using a cartridge with a single drop volume of 1 pL (DMC11601, Fujifilm Dimatix), using a single nozzle with a drop spacing of 20 µm. The final aspect ratio of the devices was W/L = 160, with a W = 16 mm and L = 100 µm channel width and length, respectively. Source and drain contact pads and the control gate were inkjet printed with the same equipment, ink, and cartridge, using three nozzles and the same drop spacing. All printed structures were post-treated for 15 min curing at 80 °C over a hot plate and by inkjet printing of Ethylene Glycol (EG, Sigma Aldrich), using a cartridge with a single drop volume of 10 pL (DMC11610, Fujifilm Dimatix) with a single nozzle and drop spacing of 80 µm. During the printing, the platen of the printer was maintained at 60 °C, and devices were left to dry on it for 30 min. The organic semiconductor, 6,13-Bis(triisopropylsilylethynyl)pentacene (TIPS pentacene, Sigma Aldrich), was deposited by drop casting a 1 wt% solution in anisole anhydrous (Sigma Aldrich) and left to dry at room temperature. The device was completed with a 3D printer flow cells with capillary inlet and outlet tubes, and with copper wires bonded on a custom-made, printed-circuit board connector.

Peptide Synthesis
Peptides pyr-EKEKEKE (pyEK), pyr-EEEEEEE (pyE), and pyr-KKKKKKK (pyK) were produced by solid-phase synthesis using Fmoc chemistry on an automatic Liberty Blue Peptide Synthesizer with an integrated microwave system (CEM). All peptides were conjugated with 1-pyrenebutyric acid N-hydroxysuccinimide ester (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, 95% pure) using peptide chemistry. HPLC analysis and purification were performed on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 PLC system with an autosampler. Crude peptides were purified by RP-HPLC on a Jupiter 4 µm Proteo 90 Å column (250 × 10 mm; Phenomenex) using: water/TFA, 100:0.01 v/v (eluent A) and acetonitrile/water/TFA, 95:5:0.01 v/v (eluent B) at a flux 5 mL min−1. The identity of the purified product was confirmed by electrospray mass spectroscopy using an API3200QTRAP hybrid triple quadrupole/linear ion trap (ABSciex, Foster City, CA). Purified products were freeze-dried and stored at −20 °C.

Graphene Functionalization
The graphene floating gate surface was cleaned by isopropyl alcohol (IPA). Twenty microliters of Milli-Q peptide solution (1 mm) were then placed on the graphene surface. After the complete evaporation of the solvent, the area was rinsed three times by 20 µL of MilliQ water to remove excess molecules.

Characterization Procedures and Equipment
Raman spectroscopy was used to characterize graphene transferred on the PET substrates before and after the functionalization. Raman analysis was performed using a Renishaw InVia system equipped with a 532 nm green laser, and a motorized stage for large-area mapping. Mapping measurements were performed on an area of 20 × 17 cm2, using 1% laser power, a 50× objective, and 10 s exposure time. The laser spot size was ≈1 mm and the accumulation time was 2 s. All measurements were performed at room temperature.

Absorption characterization was performed in air with Perkin Elmer double beam LAMBDA 1050 UV/Vis Spectrophotometer. Electrical characterization of the sensors was carried out in ambient conditions using a Keithley 2636 SourceMeter with custom software implemented in a Matlab environment. Characterization with different pH values was performed by employing standard, commercial buffer solutions (Sigma Aldrich), with the exception of pH 3 and pH 12, which were custom-made solutions of citric acid (11 mm) and sodium hydroxide (1 mm).

© 2021 Wiley-VCH GmbH
Supporting Information
for Adv. Mater. Technol., DOI: 10.1002/admt.202100481
A Flexible, Transparent Chemosensor Integrating an
Inkjet-Printed Organic Field-Effect Transistor and a NonCovalently Functionalized Graphene Electrode
Stefano Lai,* Ylea Vlamidis, Neeraj Mishra, Piero
Cosseddu,* Vaidotas Mišeikis, Pier Carlo Ricci, Valerio
Voliani, Camilla Coletti,* and Annalisa Bonfiglio
1
Supporting Information
A flexible, transparent chemosensor integrating an inkjet-printed organic field-effect
transistor and a non-covalently functionalized graphene electrode
Stefano Lai* and Ylea Vlamidis, Neeraj Mishra, Piero Cosseddu*, Vaidotas Mišeikis,Pier
Carlo Ricci, Valerio Voliani , Camilla Coletti*, Annalisa Bonfiglio
Figure S1. Single-component Lorentzian fit of the 2D graphene peak.
Figure S2. Working principle of the OCMFET: a charge Q in the sensing area recalls an
opposite charge -Q inside the floating gate; this modulation finally induces a charge -Q to be
collected at the insulator-semiconductor interface in the OFET channel. For a p-type OFET, if
Q is negative the threshold voltage shifts towards lower values (with respect to neutral
condition), as holes are collected in the channel; if Q is positive, the threshold voltage shifts
towards higher values (with respect to neutral condition), as electrons are collected in the
channel. Such shifts are representative to device switching on and off, respectively.
2550 2600 2650 2700 2750 2800
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0 Normalised intensity [a. u.] Raman shift [cm-1]
2
Figure S3. Square root of the transfer characteristic curve recorded in saturation regime (VDS
= -5 V) of a device functionalized with pyK, at different pH values. These curves have been
employed for the extrapolation of threshold voltage as reported in Figure 6(a).
Figure S4. Square root of the transfer characteristic curve recorded in saturation regime (VDS
= -5 V) of a device functionalized with pyE, at different pH values. These curves have been
employed for the extrapolation of threshold voltage as reported in Figure 7(a).
3
Figure S5. Square root of the transfer characteristic curve recorded in saturation regime (VDS
= -5 V) of a device functionalized with pyEK, at different pH values, from pH3 to pH12 (a)
and backwards (b). These curves have been employed for the extrapolation of threshold
voltage as reported in Figure 8.