Fig. 1. (a) 3D schematic diagram of a cylindrical GAA-JLT showing the materials for different regions of the device, (b) cross-sectional view of the GAA-JLT indicating the bias potentials, dimensions and doping polarity of source, channel and drain regions, (c) Schematic diagram of four of the possible cross-sectional structures resulting due to variability, namely, S-1, S-2, S-3 and S-4, (d) Calibration of the simulation model with experimental measurements reported in[18].

Table 1. Parameters[18]used for the calibration of ATLAS- 3D device simulator.

Table 2. Dimensions of the channel and oxide region in terms of the lengths of their major and minor axes.

Table 3. Calculated effective radius of the channel region and oxide thickness for different cross-sectional variabilities.

Fig. 2. Electron concentration in the channel region of the structure (a) S-1 (b) S-2 (c) S-3 and (d) S-4 atVgs=¬Ý1V.

Fig. 3. Plot of (a) threshold voltage obtained for the four structures at a fixedVdsof 1V(b) transfer characteristics at a fixedVdsof 1V, (c) output characteristics at a fixedVgs-Vth=0.4Vand (d)onandoff-current for the four structures are measured atVgs-Vth=1VandVgs-Vth=¬Ý-0.5V, respectively, at a fixedVds=¬Ý1V. Solid line: Analytical model; Symbols: ATLAS simulations.

Fig. 4. Cross-sectional view of the GAA-JLT based hydrogen sensor withPdas the sensing element, depicting the dissociation and adsorption of Hydrogen atoms at the surface and dipole formation at thePd-SiO2interface.

Fig. 5. Comparison of calculated shift in work function of Pd-gate on exposure to hydrogen gas with (a) reported experimental data[50]and a simulation study using analytical model[34], at different gas pressure and (b) reported data obtained using analytical model[34], at different operating temperatures.

Fig. 6. (a) Energy band diagram depicting the variation in source-channel energy barrier and (b) Electric field in the device, for the four structures atP=¬Ý10-11TorrandT=¬Ý320K.

Fig. 7. Variation ofSVthwith (a) partial pressure of hydrogen gas at a fixedT=¬Ý320KandVds=¬Ý0.5Vand (b) temperature at a fixed gas pressure of 10-11TorrandVds=¬Ý0.5Vexhibited by the four structures of the device. Solid line: Analytical model; Symbols: ATLAS simulations.

Fig. 8. Plot ofSI,offwith (a) partial pressure of the hydrogen gas at a fixed temperature ofT=¬Ý320KandVds=¬Ý0.5Vand (b) temperature at a fixed hydrogen gas pressure of 10-11TorrandVds=¬Ý0.5Vexhibited by the four structures. Solid line: Analytical model; Symbols: ATLAS simulations.

Fig. 9. Variation ofSI,onwith (a) partial pressure of the hydrogen gas at a fixed temperature ofT=¬Ý320KandVds=¬Ý0.5Vand (b) temperature at a fixed hydrogen gas pressure of 10-11TorrandVds=¬Ý0.5Vexhibited by the four structures. Solid line: Analytical model; Symbols: ATLAS simulations.

Fig. 10. Plot of %SSSfor the four cross-sectional structures at a fixed temperature ofT=¬Ý320KandP=¬Ý10-11Torr.Solid line: Analytical model; Symbols: ATLAS simulations.

Table 4. Comparison of sensitivity parameters of our work with other reported FET-based hydrogen gas sensor.

Cookies are used by this site.Cookie Settings

All content on this site: Copyright ¬©2025or its licensors and contributors. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. For all open access content, the relevant licensing terms apply.

These cookies are necessary for the website to function and cannot be switched off in our systems. They are usually only set in response to actions made by you which amount to a request for services, such as setting your privacy preferences, logging in or filling in forms. You can set your browser to block or alert you about these cookies, but some parts of the site will not then work. These cookies do not store any personally identifiable information.

These cookies enable the website to provide enhanced functionality and personalisation. They may be set by us or by third party providers whose services we have added to our pages. If you do not allow these cookies then some or all of these services may not function properly.

These cookies allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors move around the site.

These cookies may be set through our site by our advertising partners. They may be used by those companies to build a profile of your interests and show you relevant adverts on other sites. If you do not allow these cookies, you will experience less targeted advertising.

Outline

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aeue.2024.155337Get rights and content

Full text access

Nano-ribbons with gate-all-around (GAA) architecture have been predicted to serve as next-generation on-chip transistors, among which, the junctionless transistor (JLT) has emerged as a promising candidate, mitigating few limitations of conventional inversion-mode metal‚Äìoxide‚Äìsemiconductor field-effect transistors (MOSFETs). Due to imperfect fabrication process, the GAA architecture is often subject to cross-sectional variabilities. This work presents an analytical model for the effective radius of elliptical cross-section of the channel region having a non-circular oxide surrounding it, resulting in various structural configurations having non-uniform oxide thickness. To demonstrate the impact of cross-sectional variability of GAA-JLTs, few performance parameters, such as, drain current, threshold voltage, and so on, have been evaluated using our proposed formulation for the effective radius and the results were found to agree well with TCAD simulations. As a case study, we have emphasized on the applicability of our proposed model in variability-induced GAA-JLT-based hydrogen sensors using few sensitivity metrics. Our computations show substantial changes in the sensing device as the cross-section deviates from the ideal circular one. Our computations reveal that incorporating the effects of radius variability in the device model along with proper tuning of operating conditions can enhance the performance and accuracy of such sensors.

With technological advancement, the continuous scaling of conventional inversion-mode metal‚Äìoxide‚Äìsemiconductor field-effect transistor (MOSFET) in the nanometer regime is constrained by the strong influence of short channel effects (SCE)[1]. To overcome this, several device engineering techniques, such as, architecture, dielectric and channel engineering have been employed in the near past[2],[3],[4]. The introduction of multi-gate (MG) architectures in short channel MOSFETs have shown remarkable electrical characteristics such as, enhanced suppression of SCEs, improved sub-threshold switching characteristics, higher transconductance, and so on[5]. Despite these advantages, the fabrication of miniaturized MG-MOSFETs still remains challenging due to the sharp change in doping concentration at the source-channel and drain-channel junctions. To mitigate these limitations, junctionless transistors (JLTs) were proposed[6],[7]. The JLTs possess homogenous and uniform doping throughout the source, channel and drain regions without featuring any p-n/n-p junction. This makes the fabrication process less complex, increases the immunity of the device against SCEs, and thus improving the device performance, which mainly includes highIon/Ioffand low leakage current[8],[9]. Moreover, these devices exhibit bulk conduction mechanism as opposed to surface conduction in conventional MOSFETs, thereby reducing the mobility degradation of carriers due to scattering[6]. Further improvement in the device characteristics can be achieved by using MG architecture[10]. Among all MG architectures developed so far, the gate-all-around (GAA) architecture, with the gate surrounding the channel region from all sides, results in the highest gate-to-channel electrostatic coupling. This provides maximum control of charges in the channel region by the gate. As a result, the GAA-JLT is becoming a subject of intense research for several applications[11],[12],[13], including semiconductor sensors.

Recently, the device characteristics of fabricated GAA-JLT have been reported by a few research groups. Several analytical and compact models have also been developed in the past few decades[14],[15],[16],[17]. The majority of these models assume that the GAA device bears a perfect circular cross-section. However, in practice, the inaccuracies in the fabrication process may result in deviation from the specified geometrical dimensions. One of the methods of fabricating of Silicon nanowires (NWs) involves initial definition of the NWs using electron beam lithography, followed by creating their suspended form separated from the bulk substrate using deep reactive ion etching (RIE)[18]. The process of etching may result in some undercutting of the layer under the mask, leading to a non-uniform channel radius. Even with the optimum patterning conditions, the fabricated NWs show significant variation in their radius. Fabricated NWs usually have¬Ý„Äà1¬Ý0¬Ý0„Äâ¬Ýtop surfaces and¬Ý„Äà1¬Ý1¬Ý0„Äâ¬Ýsidewalls. The gate oxide is grown over the Silicon channel through thermal oxidation of Silicon. The rate of oxidation of Silicon is different for different crystallographic orientations due to variations in their packing density in different planes[19]. This induces non-uniformity in the oxide thickness in different orientations. The imprecise geometry definition during lithography and variations in the oxidation of silicon surface in different directions during the formation of dielectric layer are some of the fabrication shortcomings which result in cross-sectional variability in GAA devices, which has been traditionally modelled by assuming the cross-section to be elliptical in nature[20].

The deviation of cross-section from its ideal circular nature brings about changes in the effective diameter of the device[21], affecting the electrical characteristics. In this context, few works are available in the literature, which have focused on the cross-sectional variability of GAA devices. Zhanget al.[21]presented an analytical model for the effective radius of an elliptical channel GAA MOSFET. Chianget al.[22]proposed an analytical model to explore the subthreshold behavior of GAA devices having elliptical cross-section. The universality of SCEs in elliptical cross-section device was described by Bangsaruntipet al.[23], thereby suggesting that the SCE in undoped GAA MOSFETs can be lowered by reducing the dimensions of the device. The impact of elliptical cross-section on various analog and digital circuits have been investigated in[24],[25]. So far, earlier investigations assumed that the cross-sections of both the channel and oxide regions were elliptical in nature. As such, there were no variations in the gate oxide thickness throughout the circumference of the elliptical channel. Under such an assumption, earlier works introduced a dimensional metric, known as aspect ratio (AR), which was defined as the ratio of the major axis to the minor axis, as applicable to the elliptical channel or the elliptical cross-section of the oxide regions. However, the extent of variations in different fabrication steps may differ and consequently, the channel and oxide regions may not have the same cross-section. Such a non-uniform variation of the oxide thickness around the channel region is expected to increase the degree of variability in GAA devices, the analytical model of which has not been reported in the past. Hence, it becomes necessary to address the variability in context of geometricARof GAA-JLTs through analytical model for accurate prediction of their electrical characteristics.

Recently, MOSFET-based gas sensors have emerged as promising semiconductor sensing devices because of their low cost, small size, low power consumption and CMOS compatibility[26],[27]. Serving as an indispensable component in several fields[28], gas sensors detect and monitor the level of toxic and hazardous gases in various industrial and civil establishments ensuring human safety and environmental well-being along with the effective operation of various industrial processes. A number of gas sensors have been designed for dedicatedly detecting different gases[29],[30]. In recent times, in order to limit the global temperature rise owing to the green-house effect, the potentially inexhaustible hydrogen gas has become an alternative choice as fuel for clean energy generation[31]. However, hydrogen in its gaseous form is highly inflammable with very low ignition energy (0.02mJ)[32]. As a result, the development of reliable and efficient hydrogen gas sensors has become a critical issue. Various field-effect devices such as conventional inversion-mode MOSFETs[26],[28], MG-MOSFETs[33], TFETs[34], temperature-controlled phase transition FET[35]and so on, have been utilized in the past for applications related to Hydrogen gas sensors. The operation of MOSFET-based gas sensors is primarily based on the modulation of work function of gate electrode on exposure to a target gas which changes the device characteristics[36]. These devices have used different hydrogen sensitive gate electrodes such as Platinum (Pt)[28], Palladium (Pd)[37]and Poly-methylmetacrylate-Platinum (PMMA/Pt)[35]. Owing to the superior properties of GAA-JLT, the device has gained enormous interest in gas sensing applications. Recently, Mokkapatiet al.[37]have presented an analytical model for GAA-JLT based hydrogen gas sensor and showed the variation of the device sensitivity with gas pressure and operating temperature. To the best of our knowledge, the impact of cross-sectional variability on the performance of GAA-JLT based hydrogen gas sensor still remains unexplored.

Based on the above, and in an effort to quantify the cross-sectional variability, we have primarily focused on the formulation of an analytical model for the effective radius of a GAA-JLT, where both the channel and oxide regions have been subjected to cross-sectional variability, validated through TCAD simulations. To establish the accuracy, the simulation model has been calibrated with reported experimental data. Next, we have investigated the impact of cross-section variability on the electrical characteristics of the device in terms of threshold voltage,off-current andon-current. As a case study, we have applied our model to GAA-JLT based hydrogen gas sensors. We have discussed a reliable method to convert changes in the physical properties of the gas into equivalent variations in the work function, which can serve as input parameters for theoretical and TCAD models. We have investigated the impact of cross-section non-conformity on the sensitivity ofPd-gate GAA-JLT-based hydrogen sensor using the proposed analytical model, as well as through device simulation at different gas pressures and operating temperatures. We have also presented a comparative analysis of various sensitivity parameters of a few reported FET-based hydrogen sensors along with our findings.

The GAA-JLT considered in this work bears a cylindrical structure having n+-doped Silicon channel andSiO2as oxide layer. The schematic diagram and the cross-sectional view of the device are shown inFig. 1(a) and (b), respectively. p+-polysilicon is used as the gate material. However, when the device is used for hydrogen gas sensing application, p+-polysilicon needs to be replaced byPd(work function¬Ý=¬Ý5.2eV). For all our computations and simulation, the channel length (L) has been considered to be 50nm. The source/drain (S/D) and channel regions have a uniform concentration ofNd=¬Ý1019cm‚àí3.toxandRrepresents the oxide thickness and channel radius, respectively.VgsandVdsare the gate and drain bias voltage, respectively.xandyappearing in the figure correspond to the radial axes along the major and minor axis, respectively andzdenotes the longitudinal axis. The difference in the cross-section of the channel and oxide region may result in a variety of device structures, which have been broadly divided into four groups as shown inFig. 1(c), namely, (a) Structure 1 (S-1): both oxide and channel regions are circular (b) Structure 2 (S-2): oxide is circular and the channel is elliptical (c) Structure 3 (S-3): both oxide and channel regions are elliptical and (d) Structure 4 (S-4): oxide is elliptical and channel is circular.aandbdenote the lengths of semi-major and semi-minor axes of the channel region, respectively, whilea‚Äôandb‚Äô, respectively, represents the semi-major and semi-minor axis of the oxide region.Download:Download high-res image (273KB)Download:Download full-size imageFig. 1. (a) 3D schematic diagram of a cylindrical GAA-JLT showing the materials for different regions of the device, (b) cross-sectional view of the GAA-JLT indicating the bias potentials, dimensions and doping polarity of source, channel and drain regions, (c) Schematic diagram of four of the possible cross-sectional structures resulting due to variability, namely, S-1, S-2, S-3 and S-4, (d) Calibration of the simulation model with experimental measurements reported in[18].

Simulation Methodology:Prior to the formulation of our model, we are primarily faced with the task of calibrating the simulation environment to ascertain the accuracy of the validation process. All proposed structures have been simulated using ATLAS-3D device simulator, SILVACO[38]. The device meshing has been optimized following the approach discussed in[39]. To ascertain the accuracy of device simulations, the model generated in ATLAS is first calibrated. The physical models invoked in our simulation includes Fermi statistics model for carrier distribution in different regions of the device,Shockley-Read-Hall recombination with concentration dependent lifetime, doping and concentration dependent low field mobility model to consider the mobility degradation due to high doping concentration in the channel, lateral electric field dependent mobility model which takes care of mobility degradation due to charge carrier and velocity saturation at high electric field and band gap narrowing model owing to high doping concentration in the device. These models used in the simulation are calibrated with the reported experimental data[18]for a GAA-JLT. The device and material parameters used in the calibration are obtained from[18], which are depicted inTable 1.Fig. 1(d) represents the comparison of plot representing our simulation and reported experimental data for the device. A close match between the two curves indicate that the generated simulation model in SILVACO may now be utilized to validate our proposed theoretical model presented in the next section.Table 1. Parameters[18]used for the calibration of ATLAS- 3D device simulator.ParameterSymbolValueChannel lengthL50nmChannel radiusR5nmEffective oxide thicknesstox13nmSource/Channel/Drain doping concentrationNd2¬Ý√ó¬Ý1019cm‚àí3Gate work function–§m5.2eVDrain bias voltageVds0.05V

It has been reported that the quantum effects influences the device characteristics for channel width less than 10nm[40]. In this work, majority of our computations deal with channel diameter greater than 10nmand hence, quantum effects have been neglected.

To account for the induced variability in GAA architecture, we have considered four structures, which have been illustrated inFig. 1(c). Due to the non-circular cross-section of the channel, as well as the surrounding oxide regions, the thickness of the gate oxide is subject to vary, depending on the specific structures under consideration. The radius of the channel region at an angleœë, with respect to thex-axis is given by(1)Rœë=a1-e2sin2œëwhere,eis the eccentricity of the elliptical structure, which is expressed ase=1-b2/a2. Likewise, at an angleœë, the radius of oxide layer is given by(2)R‚Ä≤œë=a‚Ä≤1-e2sin2œëIn the expression,toxis the difference between the radius of oxide and channel region, which is expressed as,tox=R‚Ä≤œë-Rœë. For a structure with circular cross-section, the eccentricity is ‚Äò0‚Ä≤ and thus,toxis reduced totox=a‚Ä≤-a. For all other structures,toxis a function ofœë, which can be expressed as[41]toxœë=a‚Ä≤-a2cos2œë+b‚Ä≤-b2sin2œë. The effective oxide thickness (tox,eff) can thus be estimated as(3)tox,eff=2œÄ‚à´0œÄ/2toxœëdœëThe integral in (3) is a complete elliptic integral of second kind, which can be converted into an analytical form using the outcome of[42]. The overall gate oxide capacitance,Cox, of the elliptical structure can now be expressed as(4)Cox=4‚à´0œÄ/2‚ààoxR(œë)ln1+tox,effR(œë)dœë,for elliptical channel4‚à´0œÄ/2‚ààoxaln1+tox,effadœë,for circular channelwhere,‚ààoxrepresents the permittivity of oxide layer.

For a GAA-JLT device, the 3-D Poisson‚Äôs equation is expressed as(5)‚àÇ2œï‚àÇx2+‚àÇ2œï‚àÇy2+‚àÇ2œï‚àÇz2=-qNd‚ààSiHere,œï,‚ààSiandqdenotes the electrostatic potential, permittivity of Silicon and electronic charge, respectively. To determine the solution of (5),œïis assumed to exhibit parabolic variation along the radial axesxandy, which is approximated as(6)œï(x,z)=C1(z)+xC2(z)+x2C3(z)(7)œï(y,z)=C1(z)+yC2(z)+y2C3(z)Applying the boundary conditions and Gauss‚Äôs law at the oxide-channel interface, the coefficientsC1,C2andC3can be determined as(8)C1(z)=œï(0,z)=œïc(z)(9)C2(z)=0(10)C3(z)=CoxVgs-Vfb-œïs(z)2x‚ààSi,along x - axisCoxVgs-Vfb-œïs(z)2y‚ààSi,along y - axisHere,Vfbdenotes the flat band voltage, assuming no trapped charges are present in the gate oxide andœïs(z)denotes the channel potential at the surface near the oxide-channel interface. The expression forœïs(z)is evaluated using (6)-(10), which is then substituted in (10) to obtain the expression ofC3(z)as(11)C3(z)=2‚ààSiCox(Vgs-Vfb-œïc(z))4x‚ààSi2+2x2Cox‚ààSi,along x - axis2‚ààSiCox(Vgs-Vfb-œïc(z))4y‚ààSi2+2y2Cox‚ààSi,along y - axisNow, by double differentiating (6) and (7) and using (11), the Poisson‚Äôs equation(5)at the center of the channel is modified to obtain(12)4‚ààSiCox4x‚ààSi2+2x2Cox‚ààSi+4‚ààSiCox4y‚ààSi2+2y2Cox‚ààSi√óVgs-Vfb-œïc(z)+‚àÇ2œïc(z)‚àÇz2=-qNd‚ààSiAssuming thatœïc(z)for an elliptical cross-section device is same as that of a device with circular cross-section, (12) is compared with the expression for circular cross-section derived in[43]to obtain an effective radius,Reff, of the channel, which is represented as(13)2‚ààSitox,effReff+Reff2‚ààox4‚ààox=xy2‚ààSi+xCox2‚ààSi+yCox2Coxx2‚ààSi+xCox+y2‚ààSi+yCoxReplacingxwith ‚Äòa‚Äô andywith ‚Äòb‚Äô in (13),Reffcan be determined using the following expression(14)2‚ààSitox,effReff+Reff2‚ààox4‚ààox=ab2‚ààSi+aCox2‚ààSi+bCox2Coxa2‚ààSi+aCox+b2‚ààSi+bCoxThe variability induced in GAA-JLTs can be quantitatively represented with the help of (14) through the parameters ‚Äòa‚Äô, ‚Äòb‚Äô and ‚Äòtox,eff‚Äô. For a device having uniform oxide thickness, (14) gets reduced to the expression forReffreported in[21].

To judge the accuracy of (14), our next task is to utilize the same in determining the electrical parameters of GAA-JLTs and compare our computations with TCAD simulations. This exercise will also be helpful in predicting the impact of cross-sectional variability on the performance of the device. The threshold voltage of the device having an effective channel radius (Reff) and oxide thickness (tox,eff) has been adopted from[17], which is represented as(15)Vth=Vfb-W-2VtsinhLŒª+VdssinhzminŒªsinhLŒª-sinhzminŒª-sinhL-zminŒªHere,W=qN0/‚ààSiŒª2,Œªbeing the characteristics length expressed asŒª=Reff2‚ààSiln1+tox,eff/Reff+‚ààox/4‚ààox. The position of minimum potential along the channel length is denoted byzmin, which can be expressed as(16)zmin=Œª2lnVds-Vgs+Vfb-W+Vgs-Vfb+WeL/ŒªVgs-Vfb+W-Vds-Vgs-Vfb+We-L/ŒªThe drain current of the device can be computed using the model presented in[14]and[16]for a short channel GAA-JLT, which is expressed as(17)Ids=-ŒºeffLeffQdep22Ceff-VtQdep|QSdepQDdep-ŒºeffLeffQc22Cc-VtQc|QScQDcHere,ŒºeffandLeffdenotes the effective mobility of the charge carriers and the effective channel length, respectively.Qdepis the total mobile charge density in the channel in fully/semi-depleted mode of operation andQcis the charge added toQdepto account for the accumulation mode of operation[14]. At the drain and source end of the channel,Qdep(c)is denoted byQDdep(c)andQSdep(c), respectively.CeffandCcrepresents the effective capacitance for semi-depleted and accumulation mode of operation, respectively. Due to variations in threshold voltage and gate oxide capacitance withReff,the density of mobile charge carriers and their mobility in the channel region exhibit fluctuations, causing variations in the drain current for the structures under consideration.

Table 2,Table 3depicts the list of dimensional parameters used in our computations and TCAD simulations. TheARof the elliptical channel and oxide layer in structures S-2 to S-4 has been considered to be 1.25[44].Table 2. Dimensions of the channel and oxide region in terms of the lengths of their major and minor axes.StructuresMajor axis of channel (a) (innm)Minor axis of channel (b) (innm)Major axis of oxide (a‚Äô) (innm)Minor axis of oxide (b‚Äô) (innm)S-110101515S-21081515S-31081512S-410101512Table 3. Calculated effective radius of the channel region and oxide thickness for different cross-sectional variabilities.StructureEffective radius of channel (Reff) (innm)Effective oxide thickness (tox,eff) (innm)S-1105S-28.816.04S-38.94.51S-4103.67

The electron concentration in the channel region obtained by simulating the device structures in ATLAS forVgs=¬Ý1Vis shown inFig. 2(a-d). Structure S-1 with circular channel and a uniform oxide thickness exhibits the highest electron concentration in the channel region, as indicated inFig. 2(a). This may be attributed to the largest effective channel radius of S-1. InFig. 2(b), the elliptical channel with circular oxide periphery (S-2) results in broadening oftoxalong the minor axis. Thus, the impact of vertical electric field along the minor axis gets reduced. Due to reduced channel radius along the minor axis as compared to the major axis, the effective volume of the channel is lesser than that of S-1. As a result, the electron concentration in S-2 decreases as compared to S-1 atVgs=¬Ý1V. In Structure S-3, the effective channel diameter is less as compared to S-1 with nearly same oxide thickness along the major and minor axis. The channel area of S-3 is same as that of S-2. However, the effective oxide thickness is comparatively smaller, due to which the electric field is higher in the channel region. Therefore, higher gate voltage is needed to obtain sufficient mobile charge carriers at the centre of the channel for the device to start conducting. Hence, the total charge carrier density in the channel is comparatively less in theon-state, as shown inFig. 2(c). Due to the elliptical oxide periphery in S-4, thetoxis reduced along the minor axis. Hence, the electrostatic coupling between the gate and the channel region is comparatively more than the other structures. Thus, the device exhibits higher threshold voltage and less electron concentration for lower values ofVgs. With increase inVgs, the conducting channel width increases and owing to the same channel area as that of structure S-1, the device shows an increase in electron concentration as depicted inFig. 2(d).Download:Download high-res image (263KB)Download:Download full-size imageFig. 2. Electron concentration in the channel region of the structure (a) S-1 (b) S-2 (c) S-3 and (d) S-4 atVgs=¬Ý1V.

Fig. 3(a) shows the plot of threshold voltage for the four cross-sectional structures under consideration. Structure S-1 possessing the largest channel area and dielectric thickness, exhibits the lowest control of gate over the channel charges and hence offers the lowest threshold voltage. Structure S-4 with reduced oxide thickness and enhanced gate-channel electrostatic coupling having the highest threshold voltage with a maximum deviation of¬Ý‚àº¬Ý0.4Vfrom the ideal all-circular structure S-1. As the four structures exhibit different threshold voltages, the effect of cross-sectional variability on the device characteristics have been investigated in terms of gate overdrive voltage (Vgs-Vth).Fig. 3(b) shows the transfer characteristics of the device for four structures obtained using our proposed analytical model and through ATLAS simulation. The structure S-1, with the lowest threshold voltage exhibits the lowest drain current at a fixedVgs-Vth, whereas S-4 having highestVth, offers the highest drain current at a fixedVgs-Vth, largely deviating from the characteristics of the perfectly circular structure, S-1. The output characteristics for the four structures at a constant gate overdrive voltage ofVgs-Vth=0.4Vis presented inFig. 3(c). Structure S-4, with highestVthexhibits highest drain current at a fixed overdrive voltage. As we move from S-4 to S-1, the decreasingVthof the structures at a fixedVgs-Vth, contributes to the lowering of drain current. This can also be verified fromFig. 3(d), which depicts the plot ofIonandIofffor the different structures, measured atVgs-Vth=1VandVgs-Vth=¬Ý-0.5V, respectively at a fixedVds=¬Ý1V. It could be observed that S-4 shows the maximum deviation of¬Ý‚àº¬Ý20 ŒºAinIonand¬Ý‚àº¬Ý50nAin terms ofIofffrom S-1. The simulated results can be observed to closely follow the results computed analytically.Download:Download high-res image (415KB)Download:Download full-size imageFig. 3. Plot of (a) threshold voltage obtained for the four structures at a fixedVdsof 1V(b) transfer characteristics at a fixedVdsof 1V, (c) output characteristics at a fixedVgs-Vth=0.4Vand (d)onandoff-current for the four structures are measured atVgs-Vth=1VandVgs-Vth=¬Ý-0.5V, respectively, at a fixedVds=¬Ý1V. Solid line: Analytical model; Symbols: ATLAS simulations.

It becomes amply clear from the earlier section that variations in the shape of the channel and thickness of the gate oxide bring about noted changes in the performance of GAA-JLTs. To explore the application of the proposed formulation, as a case study, this section is an effort to investigate the performance of a GAA-JLT-based hydrogen sensor subject to cross-sectional variability.Fig. 4shows the cross-section of ann-type cylindrical GAA-JLT-based hydrogen gas sensor. The operation of a MOSFET-based hydrogen sensor is fundamentally based upon the change in the work function of gate electrode on interaction with hydrogen gas, withPdbeing the gate electrode material. This is due to the fact that hydrogen shows high solubility and diffusivity inPd[45]. On thePdsurface, dissociative adsorption of hydrogen molecules takes place with very little or no activation energy barrier, the probability of dissociation being close to unity. Hydrogen with its lower weight and size are highly reactive on thePdsurface, making it highly selective for hydrogen gas[46]. The high selectivity ofPdfor hydrogen gas can also be attributed to the high polarization of hydrogen atoms at thePd-SiO2interface. Gases such asNH3,CO, andNO2with large molecular weight and size are less reactive toPd. This rules out the possibility of interference of gases likeNH3in the detection process. However, hydrogen containing molecules such asH2S,NH3and other hydrocarbons can be detected at thePdsurface by using a thin coating of other metals such asIrandRhalong withPdto increases its sensitivity towards these gases[47].Download:Download high-res image (110KB)Download:Download full-size imageFig. 4. Cross-sectional view of the GAA-JLT based hydrogen sensor withPdas the sensing element, depicting the dissociation and adsorption of Hydrogen atoms at the surface and dipole formation at thePd-SiO2interface.

ThePdlayer assists dissociation of hydrogen molecules into hydrogen atoms, which rapidly permeates through the gate layer and reach the gate-oxide interface. A dipole layer is formed due to adsorption of hydrogen atoms at thePd-SiO2interface. This bring about a shift in the work function of gate electrode, which is denoted here byŒîœï. The work function modulation depends on the flux of hydrogen gas (œà), expressed asœà=P/2œÄmgKBT, heat of adsorption at the surface (ŒîHs) and at the interface (ŒîHi), which follows the Temkin isotherm[48], expressed asŒîHi=ŒîH01-Œ±Œ∏i, whereŒ±=qŒºNi/‚ààŒîHi0. Here,mg,KB,P,T, ŒîHi0, andœ¥idenotes the molecular mass of the gas, Boltzmann constant, partial pressure of the gas, temperature, initial adsorption energy, and interface coverage of hydrogen, respectively. The interface coverage is defined as the ratio of hydrogen concentration to the total concentration of hydrogen adsorption sites at thePd-SiO2interface.Ni,Œºand‚ààrepresents the concentration of hydrogen adsorption sites at the interface, effective dipole moment and permittivity, respectively. As such,Œîœïcan be expressed as[49],(18)Œîœï(T,P)=-Œ∏iNiŒº‚ààFor theoretical computations and TCAD simulations, variations in the physical parameters of hydrogen gas need to be converted into equivalent changes in terms of work function. To ensure a reliable conversion, the shift in the work function with operating temperature and gas pressure, as stated in (18), has been compared with one of the reported data[34]presented inFig. 5(a-b). In[34], the computation for the change in work function (ŒîŒ¶m) on exposure to hydrogen gas has been carried out on the basis of surface kinetic model of hydrogen gas adsorption, described by Fogelberget al.[49]at a temperature of¬Ý‚àº¬Ý320K. There, the rate of hydrogen adsorption atPdsurface is described by a first order process and is considered to be weakly dependent on the hydrogen coverage. In our work, the computation of interface coverage has been carried out using a second order model describing the adsorption of hydrogen on the surface[48]. The coverage dependent heat of adsorption is used for the computations. This leads to slight over-estimation ofŒîŒ¶mfor lower pressure and under-estimation for higher pressure. A comparison between the data from a reported experimental observation[50]and the shift in work function with gas pressure computed using equation(18)atT=¬Ý473Kis also shown inFig. 5(a). The nature of the curve obtained for T¬Ý=¬Ý473Kcan be further attributed to the adsorption rate of hydrogen gas onPdsurface, which depends on the gas flux available at the surface being proportional toPT[48]. A low gas pressure at high operating temperature, therefore results in lower adsorption rate of gas on the surface. The low adsorption rate along with the low sticking coefficient of gas on the surface at high temperature[45]contributes towards smaller change in work function modulation at low gas pressure as compared to the change in work function modulation at lower temperature of¬Ý‚àº¬Ý320K. As the gas pressure increases, more hydrogen molecules are available for adsorption onto thePdsurface and there is a gradual increase in the gas flux, leading to a larger change in the work function modulation. The low initial sticking coefficient of hydrogen gas at high temperature prevents the coverage dependent reduction in sticking coefficient, thereby, preventing the work function modulation to saturate at high pressure. The fair agreement of computed results with the reported data, enables us to use (18) as the input parameter for our computations in place of physical presence of hydrogen.Download:Download high-res image (167KB)Download:Download full-size imageFig. 5. Comparison of calculated shift in work function of Pd-gate on exposure to hydrogen gas with (a) reported experimental data[50]and a simulation study using analytical model[34], at different gas pressure and (b) reported data obtained using analytical model[34], at different operating temperatures.

According to the gas adsorption isotherm models[45], the gas coverage increases with increasing partial pressure of the gas and hence a rise in work function modulation is observed. On the contrary, with increasing temperature, the sticking coefficient of hydrogen gas onPdsurface reduces which decreases the surface and interface coverage of the gas, loweringŒîœï[50]. It is observed in (18) that, at any given temperature and gas pressure, the change in work function is negative. This causes the new work function of the gate electrode, on exposure to hydrogen, to always remain lower than the initial work function, that is, before any gas exposure.

The sensitivity of a MOSFET-based gas sensor depends on the number of adsorption sites present at the surface ofPdand at thePd-SiO2interface to adsorb the hydrogen atoms. One significant factor that impacts the concentration of adsorption sites is the surface area of the adsorbent (Pd) to which the adsorbate (H2gas) is exposed, which depends on the cross-sectional dimension of the device. Therefore, it is likely that the variability in the channel radius and thickness of the oxide layer will impact the surface and interface coverage of Hydrogen. When either the oxide or the channel layer has an elliptical cross-section, the non-uniform oxide thickness will influence the electrostatic coupling between the gate and channel region, which will significantly affect the performance of the sensor.

The impact of cross-section variability of the device on the sensor characteristics are investigated with the help of the energy band diagram and the electric field strength in the channel for the four structures (S-1 to S-4) on exposure to the hydrogen gas atP=¬Ý10-11TorrandT=¬Ý320K, which are shown inFig. 6(a) and (b). Structure S-1 with the largest effective channel radius and a larger oxide thickness offers weak gate controllability over the channel charges. This is reflected in the lowest potential barrier between the source and channel region and electric field strength in the channel region for S-1. Hence, the device has smallestVthand will exhibit higherIoff. The highest source-channel potential barrier and electric field strength in the channel region indicates the stronger gate-channel electrostatic coupling in Structure S-4. Hence, the device will exhibit the highestVthand lowestIoff.Download:Download high-res image (227KB)Download:Download full-size imageFig. 6. (a) Energy band diagram depicting the variation in source-channel energy barrier and (b) Electric field in the device, for the four structures atP=¬Ý10-11TorrandT=¬Ý320K.

To evaluate the sensor performance under consideration, we have defined a few sensitivity metrics, namely (i) threshold voltage sensitivity, (ii) current sensitivity and (iii) subthreshold slope sensitivity. The threshold voltage sensitivity (SVth) is defined as the difference between the threshold voltage of the device after interaction with the hydrogen gas and the reference threshold voltage without gaseous exposure, expressed as,(19)SVth=Vth|on gas exposure-Vth|referenceVth|reference

Current sensitivity has been further categorized intooff-current sensitivity (SI,off) and on-current sensitivity (SI,on).SI,offis defined as the ratio of change in theoff-current of the device on adsorption of the target gas to the referenceoff-current before exposure, expressed as(20)SI,off=Ioff|on gas exposure-Ioff|referenceIoff|reference

Sub-threshold current is used to compute the current sensitivity of the sensor because it varies exponentially with the gate voltage and hence, can easily be measured even for a small change in the work function.SI,on, on the other hand, is defined as the ratio of change in theon-current in the presence of target gas to theon-current before exposure to the gas, following(21)SI,on=Ion|on gas exposure-Ion|referenceIon|referenceThe subthreshold slope sensitivity of the device is defined as the ratio of the change in the subthreshold slope of the device on exposure to hydrogen to the subthreshold slope in the absence of hydrogen gas, expressed as,(22)SSS=SS|on gas exposure-SS|referenceSS|referenceIn this work, the sensitivity analysis of the sensor with different architectures has been performed for the hydrogen gas pressure within the range of 10-15Torrto 10-10Torr. It has been established through experimental measurements in[50]that hydrogen induced shift in the C-V characteristics is proportional to logarithm of hydrogen gas pressure over at least 10 decades of pressure. It has also been reported that at a temperature of 473Kand P¬Ý=¬Ý10-14Torr, the C-V shift is almost negligible and hence, a negligible modulation in work function ofPdwill be observed. However, at lower temperature this shift will increase for the same hydrogen pressure. In our work, the operating temperature has been considered to be 320K. Therefore, the lower limit of pressure range is set as 10-15Torr. For P¬Ý>¬Ý10-10Torr, the larger shift in work function leads to smaller effective work function ofPd.Due to high doping concentration in JLTs, high gate work function is necessary to completely deplete the device inoff-state. Therefore, higher hydrogen pressure may result in higher leakage current and hence, higher power consumption. Due to this, the upper limit of pressure for sensitivity analysis is set to 10-10Torr. For all our computations and simulations, identicalVgsandVdsholds true for each of the four structures.

Fig. 7(a) plots the changes inSVthwith partial pressure of the gas exhibited by four different cross-sectional structures giving rise to variability. As the partial pressure of hydrogen increases, the shift in the work function of gate electrode increases due to enhanced surface and interface coverage of the gas. This subsequently results in shifting the threshold voltage, thereby, increasingSVth. As discussed in the previous section, the electrostatic coupling between the gate and channel, and consequentlyVth, is highest for structure S-4 due to the lowest oxide thickness of the device. The larger channel radius and oxide thickness contribute to the lowestVthfor S-1. Following (19), structures S-1 with lowestVthand a relatively higher change inVthon exposure to the hydrogen gas exhibits the highestSVth. Structure S-4 with the highestVthand a comparatively lower change inVthin the presence of hydrogen, will offer the lowestSVth.Fig. 7(b) presents the variation ofSVthwith temperature for four cross-sectional structures. The rise in temperature reduces the gas coverage of thePdsurface and so, the work function modulation decreases. This reduces theSVth.of the sensor. Both the figures agree on one common point that theSVth.of the devices is highest for structure S-1.Fig. 8(a-b) shows the variation ofSI,offwith partial pressure of hydrogen gas and temperature, respectively, for four cross-sectional structures under consideration. Structure S-4, with highest control of gate over channel charges shows steeper subthreshold slope. Therefore, a higher change inIonis observed for a given change in gate bias as compared to the other structures. Furthermore, the high electrostatic gate channel coupling ensures a lowIoff. As a result, S-4 with lowestIoffand a relatively higher change inIoffdue to adsorption of hydrogen gas, offers highestSI,off. As we descend from S-4 to S-1, the gate-channel electrostatic coupling gradually degrades and the device exhibits lower change in drain current for the same change in gate bias and a higher value ofIoff. Thus,SI,offgradually reduces as we proceed from S-4 to S-1. Moreover, due to the increase inPd-SiO2interface coverage resulting in higher gate electrode work function modulation,SI,offincreases with the partial pressure, as shown inFig. 8(a). The reduction in surface and interface gas coverage accounts for the decrease inSI,offwith increasing temperature for all structures, as shown inFig. 8(b). A similar variation inSI,onis observed by changing pressure and temperature for the four cross-sections, which are depicted inFig. 9(a-b). Furthermore, similar toSI,off,the high gate control over channel charges causesSI,onto be on the higher side for S-4 and it reduces as we move from S-4 to S-1. The reverse variation inSI,onandSI,offas compared toSVthcan be attributed to the inverse relationship betweenVthandIdsfor a GAA-JLT device.Download:Download high-res image (199KB)Download:Download full-size imageFig. 7. Variation ofSVthwith (a) partial pressure of hydrogen gas at a fixedT=¬Ý320KandVds=¬Ý0.5Vand (b) temperature at a fixed gas pressure of 10-11TorrandVds=¬Ý0.5Vexhibited by the four structures of the device. Solid line: Analytical model; Symbols: ATLAS simulations.Download:Download high-res image (203KB)Download:Download full-size imageFig. 8. Plot ofSI,offwith (a) partial pressure of the hydrogen gas at a fixed temperature ofT=¬Ý320KandVds=¬Ý0.5Vand (b) temperature at a fixed hydrogen gas pressure of 10-11TorrandVds=¬Ý0.5Vexhibited by the four structures. Solid line: Analytical model; Symbols: ATLAS simulations.Download:Download high-res image (201KB)Download:Download full-size imageFig. 9. Variation ofSI,onwith (a) partial pressure of the hydrogen gas at a fixed temperature ofT=¬Ý320KandVds=¬Ý0.5Vand (b) temperature at a fixed hydrogen gas pressure of 10-11TorrandVds=¬Ý0.5Vexhibited by the four structures. Solid line: Analytical model; Symbols: ATLAS simulations.

Fig. 10presents the variation of % subthreshold slope sensitivity for the four structures (S-1 to S-4) at a hydrogen gas pressure of 10-11Torrand T¬Ý=¬Ý320K. Structure S-1, with a lowest gate channel electrostatic coupling and hence, higherIoffand smaller change inIoffon exposure to the hydrogen gas, exhibits lowest subthreshold slope sensitivity. As we move from S-1 to S-4, the gradual decrease inIoffand a relatively lower change inIoffdue to increasing gate control over channel, leads to the increase in subthreshold slope sensitivity.Download:Download high-res image (96KB)Download:Download full-size imageFig. 10. Plot of %SSSfor the four cross-sectional structures at a fixed temperature ofT=¬Ý320KandP=¬Ý10-11Torr.Solid line: Analytical model; Symbols: ATLAS simulations.

A comparison of various sensitivity parameters of the hydrogen gas sensors based on the MOSFET structures considered in our work with the previously reported sensors based on different FET architectures is presented inTable 4. Significant changes were observed in the sensitivity parameters, induced due to the non-uniformity in channel radius and oxide thickness in structures S-1 to S-4 of the GAA-JLT considered in this work. This establishes the need for incorporating cross-sectional variability in the analytical model in order to predict the sensor performance accurately. The off-current sensitivity of GAA-JLT based sensor is almost 150 times of that of a conventional MOSFET-based sensor. This can be attributed to the higher surface to volume ratio due to the GAA architecture, which enhances the diffusion of hydrogen atoms inPd. The strong gate controllability over the channel in the GAA architecture also contributes towards the increased sensitivity. The increase in sensitivity of the proposed device with ideal circular structure of S-1 over the reported GAA-JLT based sensor in[37]is due to enhanced gate-channel electrostatic coupling due to the smaller effective channel radius of S-1. The high sensitivity of the TFET-based sensor[51]is because of the fact that TFETs can exhibit subthreshold swing lower than 60¬ÝmV/dec, which is a limitation for other FET architectures. However, the high parasitic capacitance and trapped charges in TFET can limit its sensing performance. The trench gate MOSFET[53]offers a very high sensitivity in comparison to other devices. However, the increased number of steps in fabrication and thermal instability in high voltage-low current regions of operation may limit the application of trench gate MOSFETs[52]. Hence, the superior characteristics of GAA-JLT along with significant sensitivity when designed with optimum dimensions makes it suitable for application as hydrogen gas sensor.Table 4. Comparison of sensitivity parameters of our work with other reported FET-based hydrogen gas sensor.ParametersThis workRef.[37]Ref[51]Ref[53]Ref[51]GAA-JLTGAA-JLTConventional Inversion-mode MOSFETTrench gate MOSFETHD-TFETS-1S-2S-3S-4L (nm)5050505050504450tox,eff(nm)22.611.812222Reff(nm)54.394.455610‚àí10ŒîVth(mV)1702015.511.390‚àí70025SIoff3042140200250.210490SIon0.150.30.520.75‚àí‚àí‚àí‚àí%SSS12253744‚àí‚àí16.715.6

To summarize, we have proposed an analytical model for the effective radius of a GAA-JLT having cross-section variability due to non-uniformity in the channel and oxide regions. This variability has been classified into four structures, S-1 to S-4, and the effective radius of the channel and oxide thickness have been calculated using the proposed model. The device characteristics such as threshold voltage and drain current are computed by incorporating the diameter variability in the analytical model. The results obtained are observed to be in good agreement with that of TCAD simulations. Structure S-4 exhibit the largest deviation from the perfectly circular structure S-1 in terms ofVthby¬Ý‚àº¬Ý0.4Vand in terms ofIoffby¬Ý‚àº¬Ý50nA. S-3 shows the largest deviation in terms ofIonby¬Ý‚àº¬Ý20 ŒºA. As a cases study, the impact of dimensional variability on the performance of GAA-JLT-based hydrogen gas sensor has been presented. Sensitivity metrics such as (i) the threshold voltage sensitivity (SVth), (ii) current sensitivities (SI,offandSI,on) and (iii) subthreshold slope sensitivity (Sss) have been examined for the four structures. Structure S-1 exhibits maximumSVthat a fixed temperature and hydrogen gas pressure. S-4 shows the maximum deviation inSVth, which decreases by more than 10 times as compared to S-1. It is also observed that S-4 exhibits the highest sensitivity in terms ofSI,offandSI,on. The shift inSI,offis¬Ý‚àº¬Ý10 times than that of S-1. A shift of about 5 times is observed inSI,onfor S-4 as compared to S-1. The sensitivity of the device shows gradual increase when the partial pressure of the gas is increased and decreases monotonically as the temperature is increased. Since the fabricated cylindrical GAA devices seldom have perfect circular cross-section, the estimation of the performance of GAA-JLTs and hydrogen sensors based on such devices and structures can be made more reliable by considering the cross-sectional variability during device modeling and by optimizing the operating conditions. It is noteworthy that the induced cross-sectional variability may act as a boon for GAA-JLT-based hydrogen sensors.

Princy Sharma:Writing ‚Äì original draft, Validation, Methodology, Investigation.Subindu Kumar:Writing ‚Äì review & editing, Supervision, Software, Methodology, Conceptualization.Pankaj Kumar:Writing ‚Äì review & editing, Visualization, Resources.

The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.

Data will be made available on request.

View details