Bioelectronic Skin Based on Nociceptive Ion Channel for Human-Like Perception of Cold Pains
Narae Shin, Seung Hwan Lee, Youngtak Cho, Tai Hyun Park, Seunghun Hong
First published: 23 June 2020 https://doi.org/10.1002/smll.202001469Citations: 9
Find It at UChicago
SectionsPDFTools Share
Abstract
A bioelectronic skin device based on nociceptive ion channels in nanovesicles is developed for the detection of chemical cold-pain stimuli and cold environments just like human somesthetic sensory systems. The human transient receptor potential ankyrin 1 (hTRPA1) is involved in transmission and modulation of cold-pain sensations. In the bioelectronic skin, the nanovesicles containing the hTRPA1 nociceptive ion channel protein reacts to cold-pain stimuli, and it is electrically monitored through carbon nanotube transistor devices based on floating electrodes. The bioelectronic skin devices sensitively detect chemical cold-pain stimuli like cinnamaldehyde at 10 fm, and selectively discriminate cinnamaldehyde among other chemical stimuli. Further, the bioelectronic skin is used to evaluate the effect of cold environments on the response of the hTRPA1, finding that the nociceptive ion channel responds more sensitively to cinnamaldehyde at lower temperatures than at higher temperatures. The bioelectronic skin device could be useful for a basic study on somesthetic systems such as cold-pain sensation, and should be used for versatile applications such as screening of foods and drugs.

1 Introduction
The somesthetic senses in animals include the various senses of pain, pressure, strain and temperature.[1] Animals use their somesthetic senses to recognize external environmental changes and avoid danger, inspiring researchers to develop artificial sensory devices to study and mimic animal senses. Various electronic skins (e-skins) with a focus on mechanical sensations have been developed in recent years.[2-8] For example, e-skins for the detection of pressure touch stimuli and ultraviolet radiation were assembled from an indium tin oxide coated polyethylene terephthalate film as flexible top electrodes. In addition, the pressure sensors were built for measuring arterial blood flow, showing a high fast response time and excellent stability.

The senses of temperature and pain are an important part of somesthetic senses. The transient receptor potential (TRP) ion channel family contributes to pain and temperature sensation.[9] Human transient receptor potential ankyrin 1 (hTRPA1) is a member of the TRP channel family and involved in the transmission and modulation of cold feeling and pain.[10] Additionally, hTRPA1 plays important roles in sensing of the noxious and pungent chemical and environmental irritants as well as noxious cold.[11-13] hTRPA1 forms a single pore through the assembly of four monomers that consist of six transmembrane domains and ankyrin repeat domains.[14] The pores are permeable to both divalent cations and monovalent, and cold-pain stimuli cause changes in the pore architecture and the influx of Ca2+ ions.[10, 15]

Researches on temperature-sensitive pain sensations have been limited to the cell-based assay. For instance, analytical methods such as cell-based calcium assays or patch clamp methods have been utilized to detect chemical stimuli, cold feeling and pain. However, such cell-based methods usually require a large measurement system, a well-trained expert, and complicated pre-treatment procedures just before measurements. Thus, they cannot be used to build a portable artificial sensory device which can measure chemical cold stimuli and temperatures for practical applications. Meanwhile, hybrid structures of carbon nanotubes and receptors were used for building artificial sensory devices that imitate the human nose and tongue.[16-18] However, sensor devices for detecting cold-pain stimuli at low temperatures have not yet been developed.

Herein, we report a nociceptive ion channel-based bioelectronic skin device which can feel cold-pains from chemical stimuli or cold environments just like a human skin. In this work, we produced nanovesicles including hTRPA1 nociceptive ion channels, and immobilized them on floating electrode-based carbon nanotube field-effect transistors (CNT-FETs). In our devices, nanovesicles including hTRPA1 ion channel proteins reacted to cold-pain stimuli, and it was electrically monitored through floating electrode-based CNT-FETs. Our cold-pain sensory devices discriminated chemical pain stimuli, cinnamaldehyde, at 10 nm concentration among other chemical stimuli. Further, we used our cold-pain sensors for the evaluation of the effect of cold environments on the response of hTRPA1. We found that the nociceptive ion channel responded more sensitively to chemical stimuli at a lower temperature than at a higher temperature. This is the first cold-pain sensory device, allowing us to quantitatively evaluate the cold-pain stimuli just like human somesthetic systems. Our cold-pain sensor could be a remarkable platform to study somesthetic systems, and can be used to develop versatile applications such as screening of foods and drugs.

2 Results and Discussion
Figure 1 represents a schematic diagram which depicts a hybrid structure of nanovesicles containing hTRPA1 and CNT-FETs based on floating electrodes. The detailed fabrication process is provided in Section 4. In brief, single-walled CNTs were assembled in channel regions on a SiO2 substrate via a surface-directed assembly strategy, and floating and source-drain electrodes were fabricated through conventional microfabrication.[19-22] The electrodes were passivated with photoresist layers. Then, the nanovesicles including hTRPA1 were selectively immobilized on floating electrodes. The hTRPA1, a human nociceptive ion channel, could detect chemical cold-pain stimuli and cold temperature. For the sensing experiment, sample solutions including cinnamaldehyde, one of chemical cold-pain stimuli, with different concentrations were introduced to cold-pain sensory devices while monitoring the conductance changes of devices. The binding of cinnamaldehyde to hTRPA1 ion channels induced an influx of Ca2+ ions into the nanovesicles, increasing the Ca2+ ion concentrations. This led to increases in the conductance of the device channel through Schottky barrier modulation, allowing us to electrically monitor cinnamaldehyde in real time.

Details are in the caption following the image
Figure 1
Open in figure viewer
PowerPoint
Schematic diagram depicting the hybrid structure of a CNT-FET based on floating electrodes. The CNT-FET based on floating electrodes was fabricated by previously-reported processes including conventional photolithography and a thermal evaporation. The nanovesicles including hTRPA1 nociceptive ion channels were selectively immobilized on the floating electrodes. hTRPA1 could respond to specific chemical cold-pain stimuli and cold environments with a high selectivity.
Figure 2a shows the results of western blotting analysis to confirm the expression of hTRPA1 in both cells and nanovesicles. The cells expressing the hTRPA1 and the nanovesicles produced from these cells clearly showed the bands at 120 kDa which is the molecular weight of hTRPA1.[23] However, these bands were not observed in mock vector-transfected cells or nanovesicles produced from these cells. The results indicate that the hTRPA1 ion channels were well expressed on the cells and nanovesicles.

Details are in the caption following the image
Figure 2
Open in figure viewer
PowerPoint
Characterization of hTRPA1 nociceptive ion channels expressed in HEK-293T cells. a) Western blot analysis of hTRPA1. b) Real-time fluorescence measurement of HEK-293T cells expressing hTRPA1 ion channels in response to cinnamaldehyde stimulation. c) Real-time fluorescence measurement of nanovesicles expressing hTRPA1 ion channels in response to cinnamaldehyde stimulation.
Figure 2b shows the measurement of the cellular response to cinnamaldehyde stimulation in real time. HEK-293T cells were transfected with the hTRPA1 gene. After the calcium indicator, Fluo-4, was loaded into the cells, they were stimulated with cinnamaldehyde. The changes in fluorescence signals induced by a Ca2+ influx into the cells were measured using a spectrofluorophotometer. As the cells expressing the hTRPA1 ion channels were stimulated with 1 mm cinnamaldehyde, the increase of fluorescence signals was observed. The result indicates that the interaction between hTRPA1 ion channels and cinnamaldehyde caused a Ca2+ influx into the cells, and the expression of hTRPA1 ion channels on cell membranes, confirming their recognition of cinnamaldehyde.

Figure 2c shows the real-time Ca2+ influx profile of nanovesicles containing hTRPA1 ion channels. The nanovesicles were produced from cells loaded with a Ca2+ indicator and immobilized on the bottom of the wells of 96-well plates. After the nanovesicles were stimulated with 1 mm cinnamaldehyde, fluorescence signals were monitored. The nanovesicles containing hTRPA1 ion channels responded to the stimulation of cinnamaldehyde and showed an increase in the fluorescence signal. The result indicated that the hTRPA1 ion channels were well expressed in nanovesicles and these ion channels functionally interacted with cinnamaldehyde to induce a Ca2+ influx into nanovesicles.

Figure 3a represents the scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image of nanovesicles fixed on floating electrodes. Using a freeze dryer, the nanovesicles immobilized on floating electrodes were first lyophilized to maintain the structure of nanovesicles. The surface was deposited with Pt (≈5 nm) by a sputtering method. The diameters of nanovesicles ranged from 80 nm to 100 nm. The result indicates that the nanovesicles were produced with uniform sizes, and immobilized on floating electrodes successfully.

Details are in the caption following the image
Figure 3
Open in figure viewer
PowerPoint
Responses of nociceptive ion channels-bioelectronic skins to cinnamaldehyde solutions. a) SEM image of nanovesicles including hTRPA1 on a floating electrode. b) Real-time response of cinnamaldehyde. The addition of cinnamaldehyde at 10 fm caused an increase in channel conductance. c) Dose-dependent responses of a CNT-FET based on floating electrodes to cinnamaldehyde. The normalized signal intensity increased as the concentration of cinnamaldehyde solution increased, and it was saturated at 1 nm. Our measurements of each concentration were repeatedly conducted using four devices to confirm the reliability. The error bars represent the standard deviations of the normalized sensor signal intensities. d) Real-time electrical signal of a CNT-FET based on floating electrodes to different chemical stimuli. The conductance of the sensor did not change much during the adding of capsaicin and sucrose, while the injection of cinnamaldehyde caused a large increase in its channel conductance.
Figure 3b shows the real-time response of our nociceptive ion channel-based bioelectronic skin device to various concentrations of cinnamaldehyde in aqueous environments. The temperature was maintained at 20 ± 0.1 °C during the experiments. For the measurement, a 9 µL phosphate buffered saline (PBS) solution was placed on channels of our device. Then, the source-drain currents were monitored during the introduction of cinnamaldehyde ranged from 10 fm to 1 nm. Here, the relative conductance change |ΔG/G0| of the channel in our bioelectronic skin device at a certain concentration was used as a sensor signal. The sensitivity and response time of our sensors for each concentration were summarized in a table (Figure S1, Supporting Information). The sensor signal began to increase at 10 fm cinnamaldehyde, indicating that our sensor is more sensitive than human skins.[13, 24] However, the bare bioelectronic skin device without hTRPA1 did not show changes in conductance by the introduction of cinnamaldehyde solutions (Figure S2, Supporting Information). The results indicate that the responses of our sensors originated from the specific binding between cinnamaldehyde and hTRPA1 on the channel in floating electrode-based CNT-FETs. A plausible explanation about the sensing mechanism is that the binding of cinnamaldehyde onto cysteine residues on the N-terminus of the hTRPA1 led to an influx of Ca2+ ions into the nanovesicles.[13] As a result, Ca2+ ion concentrations in nanovesicles increased, leading to an increase of channel conductance through the Schottky barrier modulation between floating electrodes and CNT networks.[22, 25]

Figure 3c represents the normalized responses of bioelectric skin devices to cinnamaldehyde at 20 °C. Here, the normalized signal intensities were calculated by normalizing sensor signals with respect to their maximal signal values at high concentration conditions.[26] For obtaining average values and standard deviations, a measurement at a single concentration was repeatedly conducted using four or more bioelectronic skin devices. Our sensors began to exhibit responses from 10 fm cinnamaldehyde, and the responses were saturated at 1 nm cinnamaldehyde.

The dose-dependent responses of our bioelectronic skin devices were fitted by the Hill equation as reported previously.[26-29] Previous works showed that the normalized signal N of bioelectronic skin devices based on a CNT-FET could be written like
(1)
where K, C, and n are the equilibrium constant for the binding of the cinnamaldehyde to hTRPA1 nociceptive ion channels, the concentration of cinnamaldehyde solution, the equilibrium constant for the binding of the cinnamaldehyde to hTRPA1 nociceptive ion channels and a Hill’s coefficient, respectively. The fitting of the normalized sensor signals by Equation (1) allowed us to calculate the equilibrium constant K between cinnamaldehyde and hTRPA1 ion channels as ≈4.7 × 10−11 m in the cinnamaldehyde solution with PBS. The estimated K value is small compared with previously reported values measured via cell-based optical methods.[13] The result shows that our bioelectronic sensors can sensitively detect cinnamaldehyde at low concentrations compared to cell-based sensing systems. In case of other bioelectronic sensors, similar trends were reported.[16, 17] Previously, it was reported that nanovesicles including receptor proteins responded to analytes at rather low concentrations compared to cells.[28, 30, 31] These trends result from the small sizes of nanovesicles compared to cells. The volume (≈R3) of nanovesicles decreases faster than the surface area (≈R2) of nanovesicles, if the radius R of nanovesicles decreases. Here, the number of hTRPA1 ion channels on the nanovesicle surface depends on the surface area of the nanovesicles. Then, the volume of nanovesicles decreases faster than the number of hTRPA1 ion channels. Thus, nanovesicles can be easily filled up by Ca2+ ions, resulting in the sensitively response to lower concentration analytes than cells with a large size.[31] The Hill coefficient n was estimated as 0.4 for the binding of cinnamaldehyde to hTRPA1 in nanovesicles. Note that the low Hill coefficient (n < 1) implies the negatively-cooperative binding of cinnamaldehyde to hTRPA1. It might be due to a steric hindrance or possible aggregation of hTRPA1 nociceptive ion channels in our bioelectronic sensor devices.[17] It is previously reported that the binding of specific agonist to ion channel such as hTRPA1 can induce deformations of channels, resulting in remaining sites to bind cinnamaldehyde with a lower affinity.[32, 33] Nevertheless, because there are still a lot of binding sites in nanovesicles, our sensors can be more sensitive than conventional methods.[13, 16-18]
Figure 3d represents the real-time response of our bioelectronic skin device to different chemical substances. The constant source-drain voltage of 0.1 V was maintained during the measurements. Here, we consecutively added the 1 µm solutions of capsaicin, sucrose and the 10 nm solution of cinnamaldehyde to the floating electrode-based bioelectronic skin while measuring the sensor responses. The capsaicin and sucrose are chemical species that produce a sensation of hot-pain and sweetness, respectively. Here, the introduction of sucrose and capsaicin solutions with 1 µm concentrations caused the negligible conductance changes, while the addition of a cinnamaldehyde solution with a 10 nm concentration sharply caused the increase of conductance in the sensor. We repeated the experiment with a source-drain voltage of 0.2 V and obtained similar selective responses, indicating that the source-drain bias utilized in our device did not affect the performance of our sensors significantly (Figure S3, Supporting Information). Previous works showed that a rather large membrane potential can alter the responses of the receptors.[34-36] However, in our case, since a rather small source-drain bias voltage was applied, we expect the voltage bias in our device did not significantly change the membrane potential or receptor responses. The exact values of sensitivity and response times for each chemical substance were summarized in a table (Figure S1, Supporting Information). The result clearly shows that our floating electrodes-based bioelectronic skin could discriminate cinnamaldehyde from other chemical stimuli with a high selectivity.

A nociceptive ion channel hTRPA1 is also known to respond to noxious cold environments (<17 °C) and behaves differently depending on temperature conditions.[13] To demonstrate the sensing of real-samples, we also conducted the experiments of detecting cinnamaldehyde in commercial cinnamon oil samples at different temperatures (20 and 10 °C). Previous works show that nanovesicles are frozen and cannot function properly below 10 °C.[35, 37] Thus, we could perform the measurement only at the temperature of 10 °C or above. Figure 4a,b show the real-time responses of our bioelectronic skin devices to cinnamaldehyde in cinnamon oil at 20 and 10 °C, respectively. We added different amounts of cinnamon oil to PBS solutions to prepare cinnamon oil with various concentrations. For the sensing experiments, using a semiconductor analyzer, source-drain currents of the sensors were measured while adding various concentrations of cinnamon oil solutions. During the measurements, the chamber temperature was maintained as the room temperature of 20 ± 0.1 °C. For the measurements at a lower temperature, we used dry ice to maintain the chamber temperature of 10 ± 0.3 °C. The addition of cinnamon oil solutions to the sensor led to immediate increases in the channel conductance of our CNT-FET with hTRPA1, while the sensor without nanovesicles did not exhibit changes in channel conductance after the addition of cinnamon oil solutions (Figure S4, Supporting Information). The sensor signals responded to the introduction of cinnamon oil samples with the diluted concentrations of 10−13 at 20 °C, and 10−14 at 10 °C in a dose-dependent manner. The sensitivity and response time of sensors for diluted cinnamon oil solutions with different concentrations were tabulated in a table (Figure S1, Supporting Information). The results indicate that our bioelectronic devices can discriminate cinnamaldehyde in complex environments such as natural cinnamon oil with a high sensitivity.

Details are in the caption following the image
Figure 4
Open in figure viewer
PowerPoint
Detection of cinnamaldehyde in natural cinnamon oil at various temperatures using nociceptive ion channel-based bioelectronic skins. a) Real-time response of our sensors to various concentrations of cinnamon oil solutions at 20 °C. When diluted cinnamon oil solutions were introduced, the conductance of a channel increased in a dose-dependent manner. b) Real-time responses of floating electrode-based bioelectronic skins to cinnamaldehyde in cinnamon oil solutions at 10 °C. c) Normalized responses of nociceptive ion channel-based bioelectronic skins to natural cinnamon oil at different temperatures.
Figure 4c is the graph showing the normalized responses of our bioelectronic devices to cinnamon oil solutions at different temperature environments. Every data points were obtained by repeatedly measurements using four bioelectronic devices. At 20 °C, bioelectronic devices began to respond to the addition of cinnamon oil samples with the diluted concentration of 10−13, and their signals were saturated at the diluted concentration of 10−7. At 10 °C, the sensors showed responses from the diluted concentration of 10−14, and sensor signals were saturated at the diluted concentration of 10−8. The results clearly show that our sensor device responded to cold environments as well as cinnamaldehyde. We could calculate an equilibrium constant K of cinnamaldehyde in the commercial cinnamon oil at 20 °C by fitting the dose-dependent response data using Equation (1). The K is about 5.2 × 10−11 m, which is similar to the value in Figure 3c. The result clearly indicates that our sensor could quantitatively evaluate cinnamaldehyde in complex environments such as natural-oil products. At 10 °C, the equilibrium constant of cinnamaldehyde in cinnamon oil was estimated as 1.8 × 10−11 m, which was lower than that of cinnamon oil at 20 °C. The result shows the response of nociceptive ion channel activity was enhanced at a lower temperature. It is previously reported that when the temperature is below 17 °C, the structure of N-terminal ankyrin repeat domains of hTRPA1 ion channels are changed, resulting in the opening of Ca2+ ion channels.[37, 38] Presumably, the hTRPA1 nociceptive ion channel were activated by only cinnamaldehyde at 20 °C, while, at a low temperature, the hTRPA1 ion channels were activated by both cold (at 10 °C) and cinnamaldehyde so that the device responded to lower concentration of cinnamaldehyde solutions. This results clearly show that the bioelectronic skins could detect chemical cold-pain stimuli and cold environment just like human skins, and can be used for various artificial devices that can recognize pain and cold stimuli.

3 Conclusion
We have successfully developed a bioelectronic skin device mimicking human somesthetic systems to detect chemical cold-pain stimuli and cold environment, by combining CNT-FETs based on floating electrodes and nanovesicles containing human nociceptive ion channels, hTRPA1. This bioelectronic skin recognizes chemical cold-pain stimuli, cinnamaldehyde, down to 10 fm and discriminates between cinnamaldehyde and other chemical stimuli with high sensitivity and selectivity. In addition, we used our sensors to evaluate the effect of cold environments on the response of hTRPA1, and revealed that the nociceptive ion channels responded more sensitively to chemical stimuli at lower temperatures than at higher temperatures. Our cold-pain sensory devices could be a useful method to study somesthetic systems, and be used for versatile applications such as screening of foods and drugs.

4 Experimental Section
Materials
Single-walled semiconducting 99% carbon nanotubes (CNTs) were purchased from NanoIntegris Inc. (USA) and used as the channel materials of sensors. Cinnamaldehyde (≥95%), sucrose (≥99.5%) and capsaicin ( %) were purchased from Sigma Aldrich (USA) and used as received. Commercial cinnamon oil (100%) was purchased from a grocery store in Korea.

Expression of hTRPA1 Ion Channels
Human embryonic kidney-293T (HEK293T) cells were obtained from American Type Culture Collection (ATCC, USA) and cultured at 37 °C and 5% CO2 in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM; Biowest, France) containing 1% penicillin–streptomycin (Gibco, USA) and 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS; Biowest). When the cells were grown to 70–90% confluence, they were transfected with pcDNA3.1/His vector (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) containing hTRPA1 using Lipofectamine 3000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The expression of hTRPA1 ion channels was confirmed by western blot analysis.

Production of Nanovesicles
To produce nanovesicles, HEK-293T cells expressing hTRPA1 ion channels were harvested with serum-free DMEM. The cells were agitated at 300 rpm for 30 min after the addition of 20 µg mL−1 cytochalasin B (≥98%, Sigma-Aldrich, USA). Cellular debris was downed by centrifugation (1000 × g; 10 min). Then, the supernatant was centrifuged to collect nanovesicles (12 000 × g; 30 min). PBS was used to resuspend the nanovesicles, after which a protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma-Aldrich) was injected.

Western Blotting Analysis
To obtain membrane fractions containing hTRPA1 ion channels, HEK293T cells expressing hTRPA1 ion channels were harvested, and their cellular membranes were disrupted via pulse sonication (2 s on/off cycles for 2 min). Then, the membrane fraction was separated by centrifugation (12 000 × g; 30 min). The proteins were separated from the membrane fractions by sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS)–polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (PAGE). Anti-Xpress antibodies (Thermo Fisher Scientific) were diluted to 1:3000 in PBS (Welgene, Korea) containing 0.1% Tween-20 (Bio-Rad, USA) (PBST) and 1% skim milk (BD Difco, USA) and used as primary antibodies, and HRP-conjugated anti-mouse antibodies (AFrontier, Korea) were diluted to 1:5000 in PBST containing 1% skim milk and used as secondary antibodies for the detection of transfected hTRPA1 ion channels from among proteins in the sodium dodecyl sulfate–polyacrylamide gel.

Intracellular Calcium Signaling Assay
For cell-based calcium signaling analysis, HEK293T cells expressing hTRPA1 ion channels were used to observe calcium signaling through interaction between cinnamaldehyde (≥95%, Sigma-Aldrich) and hTRPA1 ion channel. After Fluo-4 NW dye (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was loaded into the cells following the manufacturer’s instructions, cinnamaldehyde-induced changes in fluorescence intensity was monitored by a spectrofluorophotometer (Tecan, Switzerland; excitation 485 nm, emission 535 nm). For nanovesicle-based calcium signaling analysis, Fluo-4 NW dye was loaded into HEK293T cells expressing hTRPA1 ion channels to produce nanovesicles. After coating 96-well plates with poly-d-lysine (Sigma-Aldrich), we loaded nanovesicles containing hTRPA1 ion channels into the wells and immobilized them by charge interactions. The change in fluorescence intensity after the introduction of cinnamaldehyde was then measured using the same procedure used for the cell-based calcium signaling assays to confirm that the produced nanovesicles were functioning properly.

Fabrication of Floating Electrode-Based CNT-FET
CNT-FETs based on floating electrodes were fabricated by using a conventional process.[16, 19] At first, for the preparation of CNT suspensions, CNT films in 1,2-dichlorobenzene (0.05 mg mL−1) were sonicated for almost 5 h. To assemble CNTs in a channel region, the octadecyltrichlorosilane patterns were formed on a SiO2 substrate (3000 Å) via a self-assembly method. The patterned SiO2 substrate was dipped into the CNT solutions for ≈10 s and rinsed with 1,2-dichlorobenzene. Then, every electrode (Pd/Au 10 nm/15 nm) were patterned and deposited through photolithography and thermal evaporation methods. Each floating electrode has a length of 10 µm and a width of 200 µm. The thickness of a floating electrode was confirmed via a SEM measurement (Figure S5, Supporting Information). The exposed CNT channel has a length of 170 µm and width of 3 µm. Finally, photoresist was covered on electrodes as a passivation layer for preventing leakage currents while sensing measurements in aqueous environments.

Immobilization of Nanovesicles Including hTRPA1 on the Floating Electrodes of the CNT-FET
To form thiol groups on the nanovesicle surfaces, hTRPA1 in nanovesicles were dissolved in a 2-iminothiolane 3 HCl solution (100 mm in PBS). The 2-iminothiolane 3 HCl solution containing the hTRPA1 in nanovesicles was incubated for 1.5 h at room temperature.[39-41] Then, CNT-FETs based on floating electrodes were incubated in the nanovesicle solutions for 3.5 h at 4 °C in order for the nanovesicles to be selectively adsorbed onto floating electrodes.[16] As a result, nanovesicles formed with thiol groups were selectively immobilized on the floating electrodes as previously reported.[16]

Substance Preparations
Cinnamaldehyde, sucrose and capsaicin were dissolved in PBS buffer solutions. The cinnamon oil was diluted at different ratios with PBS buffer solutions.

Copyright WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, 69469 Weinheim, Germany, 2020.
Supporting Information
for Small, DOI: 10.1002/smll.202001469
Bioelectronic Skin Based on Nociceptive Ion Channel for
Human-Like Perception of Cold Pains
Narae Shin, Seung Hwan Lee, Youngtak Cho, Tai Hyun Park,*
and Seunghun Hong*
1
Copyright WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, 69469 Weinheim, Germany, 2020.
Supporting Information
Bioelectronic skin based on nociceptive ion channel for human-like perception of cold pains
Narae Shina, ‡ , Seung Hwan Leeb,c, ‡ , Youngtak Choa
, Tai Hyun Parkb*
and Seunghun Honga*
2
Figure S1. Sensitivities and response times for various chemical solutions. Each table represents the
summarized data for the graphs in corresponding figures.
3
Figure S2. Real-time response of a floating electrode-based CNT-FET without hTRPA1 nociceptive
ion channels to cinnamaldehyde. Cinnamaldehyde did not cause the conductance change.
Figure S3. Real-time response of a floating electrode-based CNT-FET to various chemicals at a 0.2 V
bias voltage.
0 100 200 0
5
100nM
G/G0 Time (s)
10nM
4
Figure S4. Real-time response of a floating electrode-based CNT-FET without hTRPA1 nociceptive
ion channels to cinnamaldehyde in diluted cinnamon oil solutions. Diluted cinnamon oil solutions did
not cause the conductance change.
Figure S5. Cross-sectional SEM image of a floating electrode. The thickness of a floating electrode
was about 25 nm (Pd/Au 10/15 nm). 