Full Paper
Electrical and Sensing Properties of Single-Walled Carbon
Nanotubes Network: Effect of Alignment and Selective Breakdown
Jae-Hong Lim, a Nopparat Phiboolsirichit,a Syed Mubeen,a Youngwoo Rheem,a Marc A. Deshusses,b Ashok Mulchandani,a
Nosang V Myunga*
a Department of Chemical and Environmental Engineering and Center for Nanoscale Science and Engineering, University of
California-Riverside, Riverside, CA 92521, USA
*e-mail: myung@engr.ucr.edu
b Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Box 90287, Duke University, Durham, NC 27708, USA
Received: June 18, 2009
Accepted: August 16, 2009
Abstract
The electrical transport and NH 3 sensing properties of randomly oriented and aligned SWNT networks were
presented and discussed. The results indicate that aligned SWNT-FETs have better FET characteristics due to the
reduced number of interconnected nodes. This was particularly true as the resistance of the devices increased. Gated
electrical breakdown was implemented to selectively remove metallic (m-) SWNTs, thereby reducing scattering
centers. This technique provided significant improvements in FET characteristics resulting in greater on/off ratio (e.g.
104 ). AC dielectrophoretic alignment followed by selective electrical breakdown of m-SWNTs can significantly
enhance the semiconducting properties of SWNT networks which resulted in highly sensitive sensors.
Keywords: SWNT, Field effect transistor, Alignment, Ammonia, Sensors, Nanotubes
DOI: 10.1002/elan.200900314
1. Introduction
Carbon nanotubes have many potential applications in a
wide array of fields such as nanoelectronics, field emitters,
sensors, displays, hydrogen storage, batteries, polymer
matrix composites, and nanoscale reactors [1 – 4]. Among
these applications, the single-walled carbon nanotube based
field effect transistor (SWNT-FET) is one of the most
promising candidates for next generation electronics and
sensors because of its unique electrical properties [1].
Typically, two different configurations (i.e. single SWNT
and SWNT network based device) have been utilized in
SWNT-FET where SWNTs act as carrier channels between
the source and drain. Although excellent electronic trans-
port properties have been demonstrated in SWNT, repro-
ducible manufacturing and cost effective integration remain
important challenges for advancing the field.
Direct manipulation of SWNTs, for instance with atomic
force microscope (AFM) tips, is the most well-controlled
method to create single SWNT-based devices. However, it is
time-consuming and not suitable for mass production.
Direct growth offers nearly the same degree of positioning
but requires specialized materials and pattering techniques
[5 – 7]. Drop casting of SWNT solutions or suspensions
combined with alternating current (AC) or direct current
(DC) dielectrophoresis has attracted interest due to the
relative simplicity by which individual as well as networks of
SWNT can be assembled on prefabricated microelectrodes
[8]. A relatively good control of the number of SWNTs
bridging the electrodes can be obtained by adjusting the
shape and dimension of electrodes and the concentration of
SWNT in solution. DC electric field assisted alignment
typically results in deposition of nanotubes or nanoparticles
on the positive electrode with a limited number of nano-
tubes aligned across the electrodes as a consequence of
mechanical flow by electroosmotic [9] and electrohydrody-
namic interactions [10]. However, AC electric fields have
proven to be effective for aligning CNTs nearly perpendic-
ular to electrodes, mitigating nanotube deposition and even
detangling nanotubes depending on the AC frequency [11].
Compared to single SWNT-based devices, SWNT network-
based devices have the advantage of a more homogeneous
behavior. However, SWNT networks suffer from the fact
that they will usually be made of both metallic (m-) and
semiconducting (s-) SWNTs due to the different chiralities
obtained during SWNT synthesis. s-SWNTs with a high on/
off current ratio are necessary for transistors, whereas m-
SWNTs are required for interconnects. Preferential break-
down of m-SWNTs in a SWNT network can be accom-
plished by applying a high voltage across the electrodes,
while majority carriers for the s-SWNTs are depleted by
applying a high gate voltage [12].
In this study, we utilized two different techniques (i.e.
drop-casting and AC dielectrophoresis alignment) to fab-
ricate randomly oriented and aligned SWNT networks
based FETs and sensors. The effect of alignment techniques
on electrical transfer characteristics and gas sensing perfor-
mance were systematically investigated. The morphologies
Full Paper
Electroanalysis 2010, 22, No. 1, 99 – 105  2010 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim 99
of assembled networks were determined using scanning
electron and atomic force microscope. In addition, the
electrical breakdown technique was employed to selectively
eliminate m-SWNTs and its effect on electrical and sensing
properties was also investigated.
2. Experimental
2.1. Materials and Substrates
The caboxylated SWNTs (SWNT-COOH 80 – 90% purity,
bundle length: ~ 1 mm, bundle diameter: 4 – 5 nm) were
purchased from Carbon Solution, Inc. (Riverside, CA). The
nanotubes (1 mg/mL) were ultrasonically dispersed in N,N-
dimethylformamide (DMF) and the suspension was centri-
fuged at 31,000  g for 90 min to remove the insoluble
fraction and aggregates. Detailed SWNT solution prepara-
tion procedure is described in our previous work [13].
Substrates were prepared by atomic layer deposition
(Savannah 100, Cambridge Nanotech) of HfO 2 (Lox ¼
250 nm) on highly doped p-type Si substrates. Ti/Au (20/
180 nm) microelectrodes were fabricated on HfO2/Si sub-
strates using standard lift-off techniques where the width
(W) and gap (LSD) of the electrodes was 200 mm and 3 mm,
respectively.
2.2. Preparation of SWNT FETs
Two different SWNT network samples were prepared:
randomly oriented and aligned. Randomly oriented SWNT-
FET samples were fabricated by dropping 0.2 mL of the
nanotube suspension onto the prefabricated microelectro-
des in the absence of an electric field. For aligned samples, a
0.2 mL drop of the nanotube suspension was deposited onto
the prefabricated microelectrodes followed by applying AC
dielectrophoretic field of Vrms ¼ 0.36 V at f ¼ 4 MHz. The
alignment time was varied from 2 to 10 s to obtain desired
electrical resistance. After assembly, the devices were rinsed
with deionized water, dried by gently blowing nitrogen gas
and annealed at 300 8C for 1 h under reducing environments
(5% hydrogen in nitrogen) to improve the contact between
the SWNT network and the electrodes and to remove
residue from solution. The electrical resistance of SWNT-
FETs was adjusted by controlling alignment time.
To further improve the electrical transport characteristics,
the selective removal of metallic nanotubes in aligned
SWNT-FETs by electrical breakdown was investigated [12].
The principle of this technique was to burn/oxidize metallic
SWNTs preferentially by producing high current in them to
generate heat while eliminating or minimizing the current
flow in p-type semiconducting SWNTs. This was achieved by
applying a 20 V gate voltage while increasing source-drain
potential (VDS) during consecutive sweeps with increasing
voltage ranges.
2.3. Characterizations
The temperature dependent current – voltage (I – V) char-
acteristics for the fabricated devices were measured using a
Keithley source-measure unit (Model 236). Operating
temperature was varied from 30 to 273 K using cold-finger
cryogenic system (Janis CCS-350SH). Activation energies
(EA ) were calculated from electrical resistance Arrhenius
plots in the temperature region above 70 K. The SWNT
field-effect transistors were formed by using the highly
doped silicon substrate as a back gate. The electronic
measurements were performed using two Keithley source-
measure units in ambient environments. The surface
morphology of SWNT-FETs was examined using a field
emission scanning electron microscope (SEM, Philips XL30
FEG) and an atomic force microscope (Innova, Veeco
Instruments Inc.) in order to determine distribution of
SWNTs. In addition, line scans were conducted by standard
tapping mode AFM for the height of SWNT bundles
histogram analysis.
3. Results and Discussion
3.1. Morphology Characterization of SWNT-FETs
Figure 1 shows the SEM images of randomly oriented and
aligned SWNT-FETs. The drop cast SWNTs networks had
no preferential orientation with many SWNTs interconnec-
tions existing within the electrode gap. On the other hand,
samples subjected to AC dielectrophoresis consisted of
SWNTs aligned perpendicularly to the electrodes.
Figure 2 reports the height distributions of randomly
oriented and aligned SWNT-FETs of low (< 10 kW) and
high (> 1 MW) resistance ranges, respectively. As the
resistance of the networks increased, i.e., the density of
SWNTs decreased, a distinct shift in the height distribution
towards smaller diameter is observed, indicating that small
bundles are preferentially deposited in a short time. The
prolonged alignment time can attract large bundles, result-
ing in the decrease in the resistance and height distribution
shift toward larger diameter.
3.2. Activation Energy Characterization of SWNT-FETs
Activation energies (EA ) of randomly oriented and aligned
SWNTs networks of different resistances are compared in
Figure 3a. In the case of randomly oriented SWNTs, EA
increased by only 3.3 fold as the resistance increased from
2.2 kW to 1.7 MW. On the other hand, EA of aligned samples
showed a much greater dependency with resistance and
increased by 17.3 fold. The reported EA of a single m-SWNT
and a s-SWNTare 5 and 29 meV, respectively [14]. Here, the
EA of randomly oriented and aligned samples of less than
10 kW (i.e., dense networks) resistances were 6.6 and
5.1 meV, respectively. It might be inferred that low resist-
ance samples might have large bundles containing large
Full Paper J. Lim et al.
100 www.electroanalysis.wiley-vch.de  2010 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim Electroanalysis 2010, 22, No. 1, 99 – 105
portion of m-SWNTs, resulting in that the current in both
samples flows mostly through m-SWNTs. This is in sharp
contrast with EA values of 22.0 and 88.3 meV, respectively, of
randomly oriented and aligned samples above 1 MW (i.e.,
sparse networks). In the latter case, the Schottky barrier
height might also contribute to EA , possibly accounting for
the drastic increase of EA as the total resistance is the sum of
contact and sample resistances. Figure 3b shows a histogram
of the height distribution of three aligned SWNT-FETs
ranging from 9.6 kW to 3.0 MW, indicating that the fraction
of small diameter SWNT bundles in the devices is a direct
function of the resistance. Based on these results, high EA of
highly resistive aligned SWNT-FETs can be attributed to
more deposition of s-SWNTs containing small bundles.
3.3. FET Characterization of SWNT-FETs
The transfer characteristics of randomly oriented and
aligned samples of low (i.e. 6.3 and 5.9 kW) and high
resistance (i.e. 154 and 294 kW) are plotted in Figure 4. The
higher resistance aligned FET clearly exhibited an off-state
and a stronger dependency on the gate bias. These results
infer more semiconducting properties as the resistance for
aligned samples increases. This is also supported by the
comparison of EA shown in Figure 3a, which shows s-
SWNTs are more predominant as the resistance increases.
Figure 5 shows the dependency of carrier concentration
and field effect mobility on the resistance of aligned and
randomly oriented SWNTs. The carrier concentration and
Fig. 1. SEM images of (a) randomly oriented and (b) aligned SWNT-FETs prepared by applying alternating current of 0.36 Vrms at a
frequency of 4 MHz. The position of SWNTs is indicated by arrows.
Properties of Single-Walled Carbon Nanotubes Network
Electroanalysis 2010, 22, No. 1, 99 – 105  2010 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim www.electroanalysis.wiley-vch.de 101
field effect mobility were calculated using following equa-
tions:
p ¼ CGVG,T/eLSD (1)
m ¼ L2
SD (dI/dV)/CGVD (2)
CG ¼ eWLSD/Lox (3)
where p is the hole carrier concentration, CG the approx-
imate capacitance, VG,T the threshold voltage to deplete the
SWNTs, m the field effect carrier mobility, VD the drain
voltage, and e the dielectric constant of HfO 2 [15]. The
transconductance of dI/dV was determined from each
transfer characteristics in the linear regime to calculate m.
The value of CG slightly overestimates the gate capacitance
and therefore underestimates the carrier mobility and
overestimate the carrier concentration due to the lower fill
factor [16]. However, the comparison of carrier mobilites
and carrier concentrations can be done. The carrier con-
centrations of aligned samples were in the range of 1010 to
1011 cm1 without apparent trend with the resistance. This
contrasts with the linear trend obtained for randomly
oriented SWNTs, which may be the result of the increased
number of interconnected nodes in the low resistance
samples, which easily trap charge carriers. Figure 5b shows
that carrier mobility in aligned samples was higher than that
in randomly oriented samples of the same resistance over
the entire resistance range. Randomly oriented samples
were expected to have higher carrier mobilities than aligned
Fig. 2. Comparison of histogram from randomly oriented and
aligned SWNT-FETs at (a) low resistance (8.8 and 9.6 kW,
respectively) and (b) high resistance (1.8 and 3.0 MW, respective-
ly).
Fig. 3. (a) Thermal activation energy and (b) histogram for
randomly oriented and aligned SWNT-FETs of different electrical
resistances.
Full Paper J. Lim et al.
102 www.electroanalysis.wiley-vch.de  2010 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim Electroanalysis 2010, 22, No. 1, 99 – 105
samples because actual electrically conducting channel
lengths exceed the electrode gap length (Fig. 1). This
behavior is due to a relatively small fraction of the applied
source-drain voltage drop over the parasitic contact resist-
ance in long channel FETs, as compared to short channel
FETs [17]. However here, randomly oriented samples had
lower carrier mobility than aligned samples, most probably
because the interconnected nodes acted as interface defects,
either trapping or scattering carriers. These nodes, which are
in lower density in aligned samples, could be a dominant
factor in determining the carrier mobility.
3.4. Breakdown Process of m-SWNTs
Figure 6a shows IDS – VDS characteristics for the successive
breakdown events which resulted in a partial conductance
drop with each breakdown event. The most important drop
occurred near 12 V in the 14 V breakdown curve where the
current appears to saturate near 30 mA and saturate again at
55 mA at higher voltage after abruptly increasing. This
increase in current-carrying capacity indicates that the
number of conducting channels within the bundle increased.
This is only possible if additional channels of metallic
SWNTs within the bundle are made, which were not
originally contacted by source and drain electrodes. The
inset of Figure 6a provides additional support, illustrating
the steady on-off ratio increase with increasing VDS up to
13 V (with 20 V of VG ), indicating that additional current
paths were created during the breakdown process. How-
ever, the data indicate that there are mostly semiconducting
SWNTs left after applying 15 V between the drain and the
source as the on-off ratio increased by five orders of
magnitude. Figure 6b shows the IDS dependency with VG for
the FETs with 2 V of VDS after each breakdown cycle, which
indicates that IDS modulation is amplified as the breakdown
voltage increases with more than a 104 on-off ratio. Figure 7
shows the comparison of carrier concentration and field
Fig. 4. Transfer characteristics of FETs made of networks of
randomly oriented and aligned SWNTs: (a) low resistance (6.3
and 5.9 kW, respectively) and (b) high resistance (154 and 294 kW,
respectively).
Fig. 5. Carrier concentration (a) and field effect mobility (b) of
randomly oriented and aligned SWNT-FETs as a function of the
electrical resistance.
Properties of Single-Walled Carbon Nanotubes Network
Electroanalysis 2010, 22, No. 1, 99 – 105  2010 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim www.electroanalysis.wiley-vch.de 103
effect carrier mobility of aligned SWNT-FETs before and
after breakdown of the metallic SWNTs. The carrier
concentration after breakdown decreases due to the elim-
ination of metallic SWNTs and carrier mobility increases
due to the lack of the scattering centers resulting from the
carriers.
3.5. Sensing Properties of SWNT-FETs
Figure 8 shows the electrical transfer characteristics of
aligned SWNT before (a) and after (b) the electrical
breakdown process in the presence of different NH 3
concentrations. Since the sensing mechanism for NH3 on
SWNTs is based on a charge transfer between the electron-
donating NH3 molecules and the s-SWNTs, the carrier
concentration of SWNT network decreased upon absorp-
tion of NH3 [18]. Compared to aligned SWNT networks
before the electrical breakdown of m-SWNTs, aligned
SWNT network after the electrical breakdown show a
dramatic change in the electrical transfer characteristics
upon exposure to NH3 including shifts of the threshold
voltage (VG,T) to the lower voltage with the increase in the
concentration of NH3. These dramatic changes in the
electrical transfer characteristics allow to tune the sensitiv-
ity toward NH 3 by adjusting the gate voltage (Fig. 8C).
4. Conclusions
Randomly oriented and aligned SWNT networks based
field effect transistors (FETs) were fabricated by means of
drop-casting and AC dielectrophoresis alignment tech-
niques, respectively, and their morphology and electron
transport and sensing properties were systematically inves-
Fig. 6. (a) IDS vs. VDS during metallic SWNTs breakdown at VG of
20 V. Inset shows on-off ratio after each breakdown voltage. (b)
IDS vs. VG after each breakdown cycle showing selective metallic
SWNT breakdown after VDS reached 15 V.
Fig. 7. Carrier concentration (a) and field effect mobility (b) of
aligned SWNT-FETs before and after metallic SWNTs break-
down depending on resistance.
Full Paper J. Lim et al.
104 www.electroanalysis.wiley-vch.de  2010 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim Electroanalysis 2010, 22, No. 1, 99 – 105
tigated. The activation energy (EA ) of dense networks
(resistance < 10 kW) of randomly oriented and aligned
SWNTs was 6.6 and 5.1 meV, respectively. Conversely, EA
of sparse networks (resistance > 1 MW) of randomly
oriented and aligned SWNTs was 22.0 and 88.3 meV,
respectively. This might be attributed to preferential assem-
bled of semiconducting SWNTs and the increase of Schottky
barrier height. The aligned SWNT-FETs showed higher
field effect carrier mobilities than randomly oriented
SWNT-FETs because of the reduced number of intercon-
nected nodes. Furthermore, the electric breakdown process
eliminates metallic-SWNTs thereby enhancing transfer
characteristics and sensing performance toward ammonia.
5. Acknowledgements
This material is based on research sponsored by The
National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences under
agreement number (Grant # U01ES016026).
6. References
[1] R. H. Baughman, A. A. Zakhidov, W. A. de Heer, Science
2002, 297, 787.
[2] H. Dai, Surf. Sci. 2002, 500, 218.
[3] T. Zhang, S. Mubeen, N. V. Myung, M. A. Deshusses, Nano-
technology 2008, 332001.
[4] T. Zhang, M. B. Nix, B.-Y. Yoo, M. A. Deshusses, N. V.
Myung, Electroanalysis 2006, 18, 1153.
[5] S. Fan, M. G. Chapline, N. R. Franklin, T. W. Tombler, A. M.
Cassell, H. Dai, Science 1999, 283, 512.
[6] Y. Huang, X. Duan, Q. Wei, C. M. Lieber, Science 2001, 291,
630.
[7] M. Mauger, V. T. Binh, A. Levesque, D. Guillot, Appl. Phys.
Lett. 2004, 85, 305.
[8] M. R. Diehl, S. N. Yaliraki, R. A. Beckman, M. Barahona,
J. R. Heath, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2002, 41, 353.
[9] Y. Solomentsev, M. Bohmer, J. L. Anderson, Langmuir 1997,
13, 6058.
[10] M. Trau, D. A. Saville, I. A. Aksay, Langmuir 1997, 13, 6375.
[11] M. Senthil Kumar, T. H. Kim, S. H. Lee, S. M. Song, J. W.
Yang, K. S. Nahm, E. K. Suh, Chem. Phys. Lett. 2004, 383,
235.
[12] P. G. Collins, M. S. Arnold, P. Avouris, Science 2001, 292, 706.
[13] S. Mubeen, T. Zhang, B. Yoo, M. A. Deshusses, N. V. Myung,
J. Phys. Chem. C 2007, 111, 6321.
[14] V. Skakalova, A. B. Kaiser, Y. S. Woo, S. Roth, Phys. Rev. B
2006, 74, 085403.
[15] R. Martel, T. Schmidt, H. R. Shea, T. Hertel, P. Avouris,
Appl. Phys. Lett. 1998, 73, 2447.
[16] E. S. Snow, P. M. Campbell, M. G. Ancona, J. P. Novak, Appl.
Phys. Lett. 2005, 86, 033105.
[17] S. Luan, G. W. Neudeck, J. Appl. Phys. 1992, 72, 766.
[18] J. Kong, N. R. Franklin, C. Zhou, M. G. Chapline, S. Peng, K.
Cho, H. Dai, Science 2000, 287, 622.
Fig. 8. Transfer characteristics change of SWNT-FETs (a) before
and (b) after the breakdown process. (c) The comparison of
sensitivity from SWNT-FETs before (& &) and after (~ ~) the
breakdown process under different VG.
Properties of Single-Walled Carbon Nanotubes Network
Electroanalysis 2010, 22, No. 1, 99 – 105  2010 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim www.electroanalysis.wiley-vch.de 105