Syed Mubeen

Department of Chemical and Environmental Engineering and Center for Nanoscale Science and Engineering; University of California-Riverside; Riverside, CA 92521, USA

Jae-Hong Lim

Aarti Srirangarajan

Nanoelectronics, MIMOS Berhad, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia

Ashok Mulchandani

Marc A. Deshusses

Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Duke University, Durham, NC 27708, USA

Corresponding Author

Nosang V. Myung

Give access

Share full-text access

Use the link below to share a full-text version of this article with your friends and colleagues.Learn more.

Share a link

Metal nanoparticles decorated single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWNTs) can lead to considerable enhancement in sensing performance towards different gas analytes, however the sensing mechanism was not clearly elucidated. The detailed sensing mechanism of hybrid gold-SWNT nanostructures toward hydrogen sulfide was investigated using field effect transistor (FET) transfer characteristics. At low H2S concentrations (≤100 ppbV), FET transfer characteristics show that the gold nanoparticles at the surface of SWNTs acted as nano-Schottky barriers to predominately modulate transconductance upon exposure to unfunctionalized SWNTs on gold electrodes which showed little or no response upon exposure. Although the sensitivity of Au/SWNT toward H2S was strongly dependent upon the size and number of gold nanoparticles, the sensing mechanism was independent of it.

Since the first demonstration of single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWNTs) as highly sensitive gas sensors1, there have been numerous studies to understand the interaction between carbon nanotubes and gas molecules including NH3, NO2, CO, H2O, CH4, O2, etc.2–19. The possible sensing mechanisms include electrostatic gating1, interaction with pre-adsorbed oxygen species3, charge transfer from adsorbed gas species to carbon nanotubes4,5, alteration of the electrode work function which lead to change in the carrier mobility due to formation or removal of Schottky barrier12,15,20, etc. Although significant progress has been made in understanding the sensing mechanism of pristine SWNTs towards gas molecules, the operation/sensing mode of surface modified/functionalized SWNTs still remains ambiguous14,18,21–27. While many covalent and noncovalent methods have been employed to functionalize SWNTs with various materials including polymers, metal oxides, and metals25, metal nanoparticles decorated SWNTs have been extensively studied and have shown to cause great enhancement in sensing performance. Kong et al. first demonstrated that surface modification of SWNTs with palladium nanoparticles resulted in superior sensitivity toward hydrogen26. They attributed the response to changes in the work function of palladium nanoparticles upon exposure to hydrogen. By comparing aluminum nanoparticles decorated on SWNT to decoration on contacts, Kim et al. found that sensitivity of contact decorated devices towards NH3and NO2markedly increased compared to SWNT decorated devices, suggesting that the higher sensitivity is mainly attributed to Schottky barrier modulation between contacts/electrodes and SWNTs27. Kauffman et al.24electrochemically decorated SWNTs with different metal nanoparticles and exposed them to NOx. They concluded that the sensor response is a combination of both charge transfer at the SWNT-metal nanoparticles and Schottky barrier modulation between SWNTs and electrodes and it is a function of the individual work function of metal deposited. Recently, we demonstrated that electrochemically decorated palladium and gold nanoparticles on SWNTs resulted in a 0.4 % per ppmVand 0.07 % per ppbVdetection toward H2and H2S, respectively, while carboxylated SWNTs showed no or very little response towards these analytes18,28, again indicating that the sensing enhancement is due to the presence of metal nanoparticles. However, a number of questions remain as far as the sensing mechanism of these hybrid nanostructures is concerned. In this report, the sensing mechanism for gold nanoparticles decorated SWNTs towards very low concentrations of H2S (2–100 ppbV) was systematically investigated using field effect transistor (FET) measurements at room temperature. Gold was selected as both functional metal nanoparticles and contact/electrode material for SWNTs to differentiate the role of metal nanoparticles and metal contacts/electrodes on sensing mechanism. H2S was selected as analyte of interest because of its strong interaction with gold28,29at low concentrations (≤ 100 ppbV) and its absence of interaction with SWNTs28, avoiding any interference arising from nanotube-analyte interaction.

For sensor studies, 500 µm thick heavily doped Si was used as substrate where a SiO2dielectric layer (∼100 nm) was grown on the top of the substrate by thermal oxidation. Photolithography was employed for the fabrication of the source and drain gold electrodes. The thickness of gold was ∼180 nm with a ∼20 nm thick chromium adhesion layer. The electrode gap was approximately 3 µm. Carboxylated SWNTs (Carbon Solution, Inc. Riverside, CA, USA) dispersed inN,N-dimethylformamide solution (DMF, Sigma Aldrich, MO, USA) were dispensed between electrodes and AC dielectrophoretically aligned between the gold electrodes[30]. Note that the SWNTs in this work are on top of gold electrodes and the contact regions are fully accessible to the gas being analyzed. The aligned SWNTs were then functionalized with gold nanoparticles using electrodeposition technique.

Electrodeposition of gold nanoparticles on SWNT networks was performed using a three electrode configuration. The electrochemical cell was formed by dispensing a 3 µL drop of commercial available gold electrolyte (Techni. Inc, gold 25 ES, CA, USA) on top the SWNT networks with platinum and chlorinated Ag wires positioned inside the droplets using micropositioner. The SWNT networks along with the gold electrodes served as the working electrode, while platinum wire and chlorinated Ag wire served as the counter and pseudo-reference electrode, respectively. The electrodeposition was carried out at 25 °C and at ambient pressure. The details of electrochemical deposition are reported elsewhere28. After deposition, the electrodes were rinsed three times with deionized water, to remove any salt residues and other impurities present. Figure1shows schematic representation of a unfunctionalized SWNTs (i.e. carboxylated SWNTs) and electrochemically functionalized SWNTs, with their corresponding SEM images.1

Schematic representation of SWNT devices used in this study: a) Carboxylated SWNT device aligned between gold electrodes using AC field and b) Au nanoparticles decorated SWNT device. Corresponding SEM images of carboxylated and Au decorated SWNTs are also shown.

To determine the sensing mechanism, sensors were configured in FET mode by using gold electrodes as the source and drain electrodes, while heavily doped silicon substrate as the back gate electrode. 100 nm thick SiO2layer served as a dielectric layer. Transport and conductivity measurements were performed using a dual channel Keithley source meter (Keithley-Model 2636A, CA). The transfer characteristics of the device were measured by applying a constant bias of 1 V between source and drain while scanning gate voltage between ±10 V at a scan rate of 0.1 V/s. For each configuration, more than five devices were fabricated and studied to investigate the reproducibility and to ensure representativeness.

The sensors were wire-bonded and each sensor had a typical resistance of 500 KΩ to 1 MΩ at room temperature. A 3.6 cm3glass chamber with gas inlet and outlet ports for gas flow-through was placed over the sensor chip. All experiments were conducted with hydrogen sulfide gas diluted in dry air (purity: 99.998 %) at a fixed gas flow rate of 200 std. cm3min−1. The whole sensor area was exposed to the gas being analyzed; hence any change in device characteristics can be attributed to changes occurring along SWNT channel and across Schottky barrier between gold electrodes and SWNTs. To test the performance of SWNT-FET devices towards H2S, a constant source drain voltage of 1 V was applied across the source and drain electrodes, while gate voltages were swept from −20 V to +20 V in steps of 0.5 V. In all the experiments, sensors were first exposed to zero grade dry air and then to a desired concentration of H2S gas, and then back to dry air which completed one cycle. Similar to transport measurements, for gas sensing studies, more than three devices for each sensor configuration were fabricated and studied and representative results are reported here.

Figure2a and bshows correspondingI–Vand FET transfer curves for SWNT-FET device, before and after electrochemical decoration with gold nanoparticles. From theI–Vand FET transfer measurements, two clear differences are noticed. First and most obvious is the decrease of source–drain current after electrochemical decoration for all gate voltages. This is probably due to the introduction of gold nanoparticles, which are preferably deposited at defect sites on the SWNTs. These gold nanoparticles on the surface of nanotubes may form localized charge depletion regions24near the nanotube-nanoparticle interface resulting in charge scattering sites and thus decreasing the hole mobility. The second obvious change observed in the FET transfer characteristics is the shift in threshold voltage (Vth) towards negative gate voltage. The absolute value of the shift was found to be around 1.1±0.3 V. This shift may be due to ground state charge transfer of electrons from gold nanoparticles to SWNTs resulting in electron-hole recombination and hence decreasing hole density. Another possible reason for the negative shift inVthmay be due to the displacement of oxygen molecules20from the surface of SWNTs during gold nanoparticle decoration. Simplified band diagrams for carboxylated and gold decorated SWNTs are shown in the inset of Figure2b. The electron donation from gold nanoparticles to SWNTs and/or displacement of oxygen molecules from the surface of SWNTs may cause an increase in SWNT Fermi level, resulting in greater downward band bending of valence and conduction band edges. Because of the greater downward band bending experienced by gold decorated SWNTs compared to carboxylated SWNTs, a decrease in source-drain current is observed for all gate voltages, consequently requiring more negative gate voltages for the device to switch on.2,3

a)ISD–VSDcurve and b)ISD–VG(transfer characteristics) curve of SWNT FET device, before and after decoration of gold nanoparticles. The transfer curves were measured at a constantVSD=1 V. Inset: Proposed band diagrams for carboxylated and gold decorated SWNT-FET device configuration. M represents the contact metal electrodes.EFis the Fermi energy level andEVandECare the valence and conduction band energies of SWNTs and Au decorated SWNT respectively.

Transfer characteristics of a) carboxylated SWNT-FET device and b) Au decorated SWNT-FET device before and after exposure to different concentrations of H2S. All the measurements were done at 25 °C with a constantVSDof 1 V. c) Changes in transconductance of the device (ΔG/G0) and d) threshold voltage shift before and after exposure to H2S for carboxylated and Au/SWNT FET device. G is the slope ofISDwith respect toVGat on-state. The error bars shown here are representation from 3 samples or more.

Figure 3a and3bshows representative sensor responses for carboxylated SWNTs and gold nanoparticles decorated SWNTs FET devices towards low concentrations of H2S. It can be clearly shown that at lower concentrations of H2S (10–100 ppbV), the carboxylated SWNT device exhibits a negative shift in the threshold voltage (Vth) but no change in its transconductance (i.e. a measure of slope of source-drain current with respect to on-state gate voltage) value. If a H2S gas molecule which has high binding affinity toward gold is modifying the nanotube-gold electrode contact barrier, the result would be a change in device mobility, indicated by a “tilt” in the observed transfer curve and not the “shift” as observed here. The observed “shift” could be due to charge transfer from H2S to SWNT channel or due to the displacement of oxygen molecules from the surface of SWNTs on exposure to H2S gas. In order to corroborate the above observations, FET measurements were carried out for carboxylated SWNTs in the presence of dry air and in the presence of nitrogen (purity: 99.98 %) alone (data not shown). It was observed that when the gas was shifted from dry air to nitrogen, a shift in transfer curve was observed. As theoretical studies predict very weak adsorption of H2S on graphitic structures at room temperature31, and based on our above-observed results, we conclude that the observed “shift” is mainly caused by the displacement of oxygen molecules. By contrast, gold decorated SWNTs show both “shift” and “tilt” in their FET transfer curve after exposure to low concentrations (2–100 ppbV) of H2S. The observed shift is caused by Schottky barrier mechanism32where adsorbed gas molecules at metal-nanotube contact alter the work function of the metal and thereby change the band alignment resulting in carrier scattering and decreased hole mobility. Since both deposited nanoparticles and contact electrodes are gold, and no such “tilt” was observed for carboxylated SWNTs device, the “tilt” observed here is mainly due to the interaction of the gas molecule at nanoparticle–nanotube interface. Hence gold nanoparticles act as nano-Schottky barriers, whose work function is lowered locally upon exposure to H2S gas molecules, causing a decrease in source-drain current across the SWNT channel. However for high concentration of H2S (1000 ppbV), both gold decorated and carboxylated SWNT-FET device showed large decrease in source-drain current with no modulation with respect to gate voltages, concluding that the modulation of Schottky barrier at nanotube-gold contact interface is the dominant mechanism for both carboxylated and gold decorated SWNT device at higher H2S concentrations. The effect of density and size of gold nanoparticles were also investigated by examining Au/SWNT hybrid nanostructures synthesized with different deposition charge. For example, higher applied deposition charge led to large gold nanoparticles decorated on SWNTs. Independent of the deposition charge, Au/SWNT show both “shift” and “tilt” in their FET transfer curve upon exposure to H2S, which indicated that the sensing mechanism was independent of size and density of gold nanoparticles.

Figure 3c and3danalyzes the changes in device transconductance (ΔG/G0) and changes in carrier concentration (threshold voltage shift) for carboxylated SWNTs and gold nanoparticles decorated SWNTs-FET devices at different concentrations of H2S. A large change in transconductance with increasing H2S concentrations is observed for Au-SWNTs, compared to practically no change observed in the carboxylated SWNTs device. This indicates that the sensing region that is most responsible for conductance modulation is localized near the gold nanoparticle–nanotube interface. As the absolute values of threshold voltage shift are almost similar for both carboxylated and gold decorated samples, it is hard to determine whether the shift observed in gold decorated SWNTs is because of electrostatic gating at nanotube–nanoparticle interface or displacement of oxygen molecules as observed for carboxylated SWNT device or a combination of both.

Figure4ashows real-time responses of gold decorated and carboxylated SWNT device towards different concentrations of H2S (at zero gate voltage). The sensitivity (ΔR/R0) of Au decorated and carboxylated SWNT devices is reported in Figure4b. The results clearly show that the gold decorated SWNT device has a lower detection limit and a greater sensitivity towards H2S compared to the carboxylated SWNT device. As was demonstrated above, this significant increase in sensitivity is primarily due to the increased nano-Schottky barriers introduced by gold decoration, resulting in local modulation of the work function upon exposure to gas molecules.4

a) Real time detection of H2S at 25 °C under zero gate voltage for carboxylated and gold decorated SWNT device with a constantVSDof 1 V. b) Calculated sensitivity (ΔR/R0) of carboxylated and Au/SWNT devices, whereRis the resistance of the device atVSDof 1 V and at zero gate voltage. The error bars shown here are representations from 3 samples or more.

The sensing mechanism of carboxylated and gold decorated SWNT-FET devices towards H2S was investigated. Since the SWNTs were functionalized with same material as the electrode contacts and the SWNTs had very low adsorption capacity for the gaseous analyte, the role of the functional elements on sensing could be isolated and explained. These results indicate that gold nanoparticles functionalized on SWNT surface act as nano-Schottky barriers and play a dominant part in hole mobility modulation by gaseous molecule interaction. We speculate that the same mechanism may exist for other metals functionalized on the surface of SWNTs. Of course, the extent of conductance modulation will depend on the choice of the metallic functional element and on the gaseous analyte. A greater understanding of the role of functional elements in sensing will help in optimizing SWNT-FET devices and will results in more sensitive and selective gas sensors.

Funding for the project was provided by the NIH Genes, Environment and Health Initiative through award U01 ES 016026 and the Fundamental R&D Program for Core Technology of Materials funded by theMinistry of Knowledge Economy, Republic of Korea.

Volume23,Issue11

Special Issue:Topical Cluster: Electroanalysis and Electrochemical Biosensors in Brazil

November 2011

Pages2687-2692

Copyright © 1999-2025John Wiley & Sons, Incor related companies. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence technologies or similar technologies.

Your password has been changed

Enter your email address below.

Please check your email for instructions on resetting your password.
                    If you do not receive an email within 10 minutes, your email address may not be registered,
                    and you may need to create a new Wiley Online Library account.

Can't sign in? Forgot your username?

Enter your email address below and we will send you your username

If the address matches an existing account you will receive an email with instructions to retrieve your username