Marangoni Flow Driven via Hole Structure of Soluble Acene–Polymer Blends for Selective Nitrogen Dioxide Sensing
Jung Hun Lee, Seunghan Lee, Hoonkyung Lee, Hyun Ho Choi, Huijeong Chae, Youngnan Kim, Seok Joo Yang, John E. Anthony, Ho Won Jang, Sang Min Won, Wi Hyoung Lee
First published: 16 April 2023 https://doi.org/10.1002/adfm.202215215Citations: 4
SectionsPDFTools Share
Abstract
The correlations between semiconductor type and gas sensing properties in soluble acene/polymer blends have not yet been examined. Here, the phase separation mechanism in pseudo-liquid phase blend film is investigated and an unusual solid-state morphology that is effective for amperometric gas sensing performance is demonstrated. In 6,13-bis(triisopropylsilylethynyl) pentacene (TIPS–pentacene)/poly(fluorine-co-triarylamine) (PTAA) blend, two phases are uniformly mixed, without being completely phase-separated due to the similar solubility and surface tension. On the other hand, in 2,8-difluoro-5,11-bis(triethylsilylethynyl) anthradithiophene (diF–TES ADT)/PTAA blend, the diF−TES ADT molecules are segregated both at the air–film, and film–substrate interfaces, and subsequently crystallized with a high degree of crystal perfection. In the meanwhile, Marangoni-flow induces crater-like via hole structure of PTAA at the middle layer. In situ measurement of (ultraviolet–visible) UV–vis absorption spectra and computational calculation reveal kinetics of liquid–solid–crystal transition in relation to the functional groups of soluble acene. Interestingly, flow driven hole structure of PTAA in diF–TES ADT/PTAA blend film allows the target NO2 gas to selectively penetrate the channel region, thereby enhancing sensitivity toward NO2, while decreasing affinity with other gases. The results provide protocols for fabricating highlperformance field-effect transistors and gas sensors in a blending system.

1 Introduction
Blending small molecular semiconductors with amorphous polymers has proved an attractive process due to the beneficial characteristics of multiple components in a single system. In these blend systems, the small molecules ensure high charge carrier mobility, while the addition of polymer allows efficient control over film-forming characteristics and microstructural engineering. Recently, small molecular semiconductors, such as 6,13-bis(triisopropylsilylethynyl) pentacene (TIPS–pentacene),[1] and 2,8-difluoro-5,11-bis(triethylsilylethynyl) anthradithiophene (diF−TES ADT),[2] having a crystal packing motif of 2D “brick-wall” between the two adjacent acene moieties, exhibited high field-effect mobility up to or over 5 cm2 V−1 s−1 in a binary blend system with the insulating and conjugated polymer as polystyrene (PS),[1, 2] poly α methyl styrene (PαMS),[1] poly(triarylamine) (PTAA),[2] and poly(dialkyl-fluorene-co-dimethyl-triarylamine) (PF-TAA),[2] respectively. In addition, ternary blend organic field-effect transistors (OFETs) based on the small molecule 2,7-dooctyl[1]-benzothieno[3,2-b][1]benzothiophene (C8-BTBT), the polymer poly(indacenodithiophene-co-benzothiadiazole) (IDT-BT), and the Lewis acid additive bis(pentafluorophenyl)zinc ((C6F5)2 Zn) show the hole mobility >20 cm2 V−1 s−1.[3] However, for outstanding device performance in the blend system, the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) level of the small molecular semiconductor and the semiconducting polymer should be matched for efficient hole transport, and an appropriate solution treatment is required for the optimized phase-separated structure.

In a blend system, vertical phase separation is ideal for the active layer in OFETs, because the charge carriers generally travel in a direction parallel to the dielectric surface. Here, the vertical phase separation depends on molecular and processing parameters, such as types of semiconductor and counterpart polymer, molecular weight (Mw) of the polymer, solubility of components, surface tension of the substrate, and solvent evaporation rate (e.g., spinning speed, spin coating time).[4] Once vertically phase-separated structure is formed under spin-casting, the transient wetting layer is unstable, mainly due to the Marangoni instability.[5] Although the components with low surface energy migrate toward the air–film interface while other components having a high surface energy diffuse to the film–substrate interface, the destabilization of the transient wetting layer leads to a laterally phase-separated structure. To this end, vertical phase-separated structures can be achieved under well-controlled conditions with appropriate blend pairs and processing conditions.

In the small molecular semiconductor/amorphous polymer blend system, top-gate OFETs typically exhibit greater electrical performance than bottom-gate OFETs. A small molecular semiconductor with lower surface energy than polymer allows the small molecule to spontaneously phase-separate upwards, with consequences of surface segregation and crystallization at the gate–dielectric interface in top-gate OFETs.[6] However, the top-gate structure limits several sensor applications. For example, the OFETs with the top-gate structure are not applicable for gas, chemical, or biological sensors, because the gate–dielectric blocks the direct interaction between the analyte and semiconducting layer. On the other hand, other reports demonstrate the segregation of small molecular semiconductors at the dielectric interface and their uses in the active layer of bottom-gate OFETs;[7] the associated mechanism for such segregation is not well understood in terms of surface energetics. Therefore, it is necessary to develop a theoretical model and experimental set-up for the phase-separated structure in bottom-gate OFETs, used for the gas and chemical sensors. Here, the formation mechanism of the phase-separation structure should be understood by considering blend pairs and processing parameters.

The electrical characteristics of OFETs, such as the on current (Ion), field-effect mobility (µ), and threshold voltage (Vth), are affected by the existence of the gas analytes at the semiconducting layer near the interface.[4, 8] Here, the gas analytes affect the lateral charge transport between source and drain electrodes, owing to their dipolar property. Controlling the microstructure of the semiconducting layer is vital to enhancing the sensing properties of OFET gas sensors because gas molecules should penetrate the semiconducting layer to reach the interface between the semiconductor and gate–dielectric. For example, it has been reported that grain boundary, film thickness, and microstructure (i.e., porosity) affect the sensing performance of the sensor.[4, 8, 9] In principle, the interaction between the organic semiconductor and the target gas molecule depends on the molecular design of the organic semiconductor. Thus, the composition of the active layer is important for the selective detection of target gas molecules. Manipulation of such composition could be easily facilitated by adopting polymer blends with different sensing affinities. On the other hand, there have not been extensive studies to examine the correlation between semiconductor type and gas sensing performance (e.g., sensitivity, selectivity) in small molecular semiconductor/amorphous polymer blends. In addition, the phase-separated structure also affects the diffusion capability of the target gas molecule. Therefore, an appropriate phase-separated structure designed for target gas sensing should be developed.

This report investigated the correlation between the molecular structure of the small molecular semiconductor (e.g., the so-called soluble acene), and the electrical/gas sensing characteristics of soluble acene/conjugated polymer blends. Two soluble acenes (TIPS–pentacene, diF−TES ADT) were blended with PTAA to be used as active layers for OFETs made for the gas sensors. PTAA was adopted for the counterpart semiconducting polymer, because its HOMO level matches well with the HOMO levels of the TIPS–pentacene and diF−TES ADT. In the diF−TES ADT/PTAA blend, the crater-like via hole structure was formed by the Marangoni flow, while a marginally phase-separated intermixed structure was formed in the TIPS–pentacene/PTAA blend. The formation mechanism of the phase-separated structures was studied by measuring the surface energy and solubility of each component. Additionally, the kinetic analysis related to the crystallization rate of the soluble acene was conducted by using experimental methods (e.g., UV–vis spectroscopy, Differential scanning calorimetry (DSC)) and computational calculation (e.g., Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof (PBE)). Bottom-gate OFETs were fabricated to measure the electrical and gas sensing properties. The target gas molecules of NO2, NH3, SO2, and CO2, all well known for being toxic gases, were thoroughly tested, along with the study of the selective response according to the component and their phase-separated microstructures in a blended film. In particular, we found that the via hole structure in diF−TES ADT/PTAA blend is extremely useful for the sensitive and selective gas sensing element.

2 Results and Discussion
The spinning times of blend solutions were optimized following the previously reported method in the soluble acenes/insulating polymer blend system.[4] The amount of residual solvent, which is controlled by the spin-coating time, greatly affects microstructural evolution, including surface segregation and crystallization of the soluble acene. Here, the temporary pseudo-liquid phase forms by the residual solvent; that is, conjugated components are slightly swollen immediately before forming a solid-state film, which plays an important role in phase separation. We found that the crystallization speed of diF−TES ADT is higher than that of TIPS–pentacene.[10] The detailed crystallization kinetics were examined with in situ UV–vis spectroscopy, differential scanning calorimetry (DSC), and density functional theory (DFT) calculation, which are provided in the following section. Figure 1a shows the molecular structure of diF−TES ADT, TIPS−pentacene, and PTAA, respectively. In the diF−TES ADT/PTAA blend, a small amount of residual solvent at a longer spin casting time (80 s) is enough for the surface segregation and crystallization of diF−TES ADT molecules onto the phase-separated PTAA layer at the bottom. On the other hand, in TIPS–pentacene/PTAA blends, the spin time of 50 s was an optimum condition for the maximized electrical properties.[4] Thus, we fabricated soluble acenes/PTAA FETs by spin-casting the diF−TES ADT/PTAA blend solution and the TIPS–pentacene/PTAA blend solution for (80 and 50) seconds, respectively (see Figure 1b).

Details are in the caption following the image
Figure 1
Open in figure viewer
PowerPoint
a) Molecular structures of soluble acene and conjugated polymer and b) device architecture of field-effect transistor based on soluble acene/conjugated polymer blends. The following are the surface morphologies and structural information of diF−TES ADT/PTAA versus TIPS–pentacene/PTAA blend films. Atomic force microscopy (AFM) height images of the c) diF−TES ADT/PTAA and d) TIPS–pentacene/PTAA blend films. The insets of AFM images in (c) and (d) show the 3D surface topographies. Intensities of atomic elements in ToF-SIMS of the e) diF−TES ADT/PTAA and f) TIPS–pentacene/PTAA blend films as a function of sputtering time. 2D-GIXD patterns of the g) diF−TES ADT/PTAA and h) TIPS–pentacene/PTAA blend films.
The morphologies of the spin-cast blend films were observed using the polarized optical microscopy (POM) and atomic force microscopy (AFM) (Figure 1c,d; Figure S1 (Supporting Information). Directional microstrip crystals were formed in the diF−TES ADT/PTAA blend film (Figure S1a, Supporting Information). On the other hand, isotropic trans-crystals with a high density of grain boundaries were formed in the TIPS–pentacene/PTAA blend film (Figure S1b, Supporting Information). Because the continuity of crystal grain across the active channel is important to determine the capability of lateral charge transport, detailed crystalline microstructures were measured by AFM. The diF−TES ADT/PTAA blend film shows a continuous pillar-like microstructure of the diF−TES ADT, while the TIPS–pentacene/PTAA blend film shows a sparse rod-shaped microstructure (Figure 1c,d). Because PTAA is an amorphous semiconducting polymer with featureless film morphology, it does not contribute to the crystalline film microstructure. Judging from the surface microstructures, it was confirmed that soluble acenes (i.e., diF−TES ADT, TIPS–pentacene) were preferentially phase-separated at the air–film interface in both blend films. To investigate the inner structure of the blend films, surface-segregated soluble acene layers were selectively etched with n-hexane. Note that PTAA is insoluble in n-hexane. The etched diF−TES ADT/PTAA blend film exhibits a unique structure with a bunch of holes (Figure S2a, Supporting Information), which correspond well with the pores at the surface (Figure 1c). In addition, these holes are connected to the SiO2/Si substrate, as confirmed by the different phase contrast between the interior and exterior hole regions (Figure S3c, Supporting Information). This result indicates that the via hole structure of PTAA is formed during the spin-casting of the diF−TES ADT/PTAA blend solution. On the other hand, in the etched film of the TIPS–pentacene/PTAA blend, the PTAA clusters were unevenly distributed (Figures S1d,S2b, Supporting Information). We speculate that TIPS–pentacene molecules in the middle layer are mixed with matrix PTAA polymer under etching with n-hexane. Birefringence of the etched blend films in the POM images hints that soluble acene molecules still remain at the film–substrate interface (Figure S1c,d, Supporting Information). The quantitative analysis of vertical phase separation was further conducted by the time-of-flight secondary ion mass spectrometry (ToF-SIMS) studies.

To analyze the vertical distribution of the components in the soluble acene/PTAA blend films, depth profiling with ToF-SIMS was conducted in two types of blend samples (Figure 1e,f). The distribution of the diF−TES ADT phase relative to the PTAA phase was investigated by analyzing the contents of C−, F−, Si−, CN−, and SiO− ions as a function of sputter time. Here, the CN− elements were extracted instead of the N− ions, because the intensity of N− was very low under the negative polarity. Thus, it should be kept in mind that the peak of CN− contains the C− peak. F− and CN− represent the existence of diF−TES ADT and PTAA, respectively. The high-intensity profiles of F− ions at the sputter times of (0 and 250) seconds suggest that diF−TES ADT molecules in the blend film are preferentially positioned at both the air–film interface, and the film–substrate interface (Figure 2e). Additionally, the high intensity of CN− at the center position of the two F− peaks implies that the diF−TES ADT/PTAA blend film is composed of a tri-layer structure, that is, diF−TES ADT (top)/PTAA + diF−TES ADT (middle)/diF−TES ADT (bottom). On the other hand, the inner composition of the TIPS–pentacene/PTAA blend was analyzed by measuring the ions of C−, Si−, CN−, and SiO−. The intensity of CN− elements appeared to be evenly distributed in the whole region of the blend film (Figure 2f). The small Si− peak at the initial sputter time of 20 s indicates that TIPS–pentacene is preferentially phase-separated at the air–film interface. This surface segregation is consistent with the AFM image in Figure 1d. However, most of the measured ions were evenly distributed in the rest of the region, implying that the TIPS–pentacene and PTAA are uniformly mixed, rather than completely phase-separated in the blend film.

Details are in the caption following the image
Figure 2
Open in figure viewer
PowerPoint
In situ UV–vis absorption spectra of a) diF−TES ADT/PTAA, and b) TIPS–pentacene/PTAA blend films after spin-casting for 50 and 80 s, respectively. The red-shift of the maximum absorption peaks of diF-TES ADT (530–550 nm) and TIPS-pentacene (648–693 nm) was measured in a time-dependent manner through the UV–vis absorption spectra. c) Packing motifs of diF−TES ADT and d) TIPS-pentacene. e) Changes of enthaly under the phase transistion of diF−TES ADT and TIPS-pentacene: from liqud to solid and crytal.
To examine the crystalline structure of diF−TES ADT and TIPS–pentacene in blend films, two-dimensional grazing incidence X-ray diffraction (2D-GIXD) patterns were obtained for the devices based on two different soluble acenes. As shown in Figure 1g, the out-of-plane and in-plane diffraction peaks were clearly identified in the diF−TES ADT/PTAA blend film. The in-plane peaks were especially sharply pointed, indicating that the diF−TES ADT molecules in the crystal structure were regularly arranged in a planar structure along the −x and −y directions. On the other hand, vague in-plane diffraction spots in the TIPS–pentacene/PTAA blends indicate that the TIPS–pentacene molecules adopt a high degree of misorientation along the in-plane directions. The 2D-GIXD results suggest that diF−TES ADT has superior crystallization capability to that of TIPS–pentacene under blending with PTAA. In addition to the intrinsically excellent crystallization capability of diF−TES ADT, phase-separation characteristics with PTAA should also be taken into account. Preferential segregation of diF−TES ADT at both the air–film, and film–substrate interfaces enables efficient crystallization of diF−TES ADT molecules, but incomplete phase separation between TIPS–pentacene and PTAA prohibits crystallization of TIPS–pentacene molecules in the PTAA matrix (Figure 1g,h). To find the origin of such phase-separation difference in diF−TES ADT and TIPS–pentacene blends with PTAA, molecular aspects, such as surface energy and solubility, were examined, and provided in the following section.

In a blending system, the surface energy of the two mixing materials controls the morphological and structural development under phase separation. The surface energy of each component was estimated by measuring the contact angle after solvent dropping (Figure S4a–c, Supporting Information). When an organic solvent, such as diiodomethane, was dropped on the films, it immediately dissolves the films, and the measured values of contact angles become inaccurate. Thus, only water contact angles were collected. The water contact angle of thin films made of the diF−TES ADT, TIPS–pentacene, and PTAA are (103, 98, and 92)°, respectively. Because the water contact angle is inversely proportional to the surface energy, the surface energy is ordered as follows: PTAA > TIPS–pentacene > diF−TES ADT. Because the component with lower surface energy in the binary blend system is preferentially phase-separated at the air–film interface, the diF−TES ADT or TIPS–pentacene in blend film could be located at the top surface. In particular, diF−TES ADT with the lowest surface energy has a higher tendency for surface segregation than TIPS–pentacene. This result is consistent with surface characterization with AFM, and depth profiling with ToF-SIMS. However, the preferential segregation of diF−TES ADT at the film–substrate interface is not explained by the surface energetics. To understand this phenomenon, the solubility of each component in 1,2-dichlorobenzene was obtained by measuring the UV–vis absorption of saturated solutions at RT (Figure S5, Supporting Information).[11] The solubility parameters were determined by the following steps: 1) Extraction of the slope from the absorbance at the λmax with varying solution concentration. The slope means the molar extinction coefficient (ɛ), which is the intrinsic value of each substance (Figure S5a–c, Supporting Information). 2) Preparation of the saturated solutions of each substance, and measurement of the absorbance (A) of the diluted solutions by factors of (300, 400, and 500). 3) Derivation of the concentration of the saturated solution (c) by using the following Beer's law:[11]
(1)
where, l is the beam path length, and the value is 10 mm.
The concentrations of the saturated solution in 1,2-dichlorobenzene of PTAA, diF−TES ADT, and TIPS–pentacene were measured to be (13.11, 10.91, and 12.03) mg mL−1, respectively (Table 1). The low solubility of diF−TES ADT compared to PTAA accounts for the preferential segregation of diF−TES ADT at the film–substrate interface. From the analyses of surface energy and solubility, a tri-layer structure of diF−TESADT (top, lower surface energy)/PTAA-rich (middle)/diF−TES ADT (bottom, lower solubility) can be rationalized. However, the surface energy and solubility of TIPS–pentacene are not significantly different from those of PTAA, which resulted in marginal phase separation in the TIPS–pentacene/PTAA blend.

Table 1. Absorption maximum peak, molar attenuation coefficient, and concentration of the saturated solution in the pristine PTAA, diF−TES ADT, and TIPS–pentacene by measuring the UV–Vis absorption spectra
Organic semiconductors	λmax [nm]	e [mL mg−1 cm−1]	Csaturated solution [mg mL−1]
PTAA	388	71.68 ± 1.51	13.11 ± 0.97
diF−TES ADT	530	48.69 ± 1.71	10.91 ± 0.58
TIPS–pentacene	647	36.96 ± 0.89	12.03 ± 0.08
The crystallization rate of soluble acene is also an important factor affecting the structural formation under phase separation of the blend solution. For accurate comparison of the crystallization kinetics of diF−TES ADT and TIPS–pentacene molecules during solvent evaporation in spin-cast soluble acene/PTAA blend films, the in situ UV–vis absorption spectra of the blend films after spin-casting for (50 and 80) seconds were recorded in a time-dependent manner (Figure S6, Supporting Information and summarized in Figure 2a,b). At the initial stage of solvent evaporation, the absorption peaks in the diF−TES ADT/PTAA blend films were observed at ≈310, 460, 493, and 530 nm (Figure S6a,b, Supporting Information), while the peaks in the TIPS–pentacene/PTAA blend film were observed at ≈310, 553, 596, and 647 nm (Figures S6c,d, Supporting Information). The absorption peak at 310 nm, which is blue-shifted from the peak in the single PTAA solution (Figure S5d, Supporting Information), corresponds to the absorption from PTAA chains.[12] The absorption peaks appearing at longer wavelengths match well with the absorption of soluble acene solutions (Figure S5e,f, Supporting Information), corresponding to the states where the diF−TES ADT and TIPS–pentacene are in free molecules.[13] The observation of solution state peaks in spin-cast blend films is a direct consequence of residual 1,2-dichlorobenzene with extremely low vapor pressure. The as-spun blend films contain the residual solvent, which enables the solvation of soluble acene molecules for up to several minutes. When the residual solvent evaporates more and the solution becomes viscous, soluble acene molecules self-assemble to form crystalline films by spontaneous π–π interaction. At this stage (denoted by * symbol for the onset time), the absorption peaks red-shift to 484, 519, and 549 nm in the diF−TES ADT/PTAA blend films, and to 594, 648, and 694 nm in the TIPS–pentacene/PTAA blend films, which match with the peaks in the solid-state thin-films of diF−TES ADT and TIPS–pentacene, respectively.[6, 14] Simultaneously, peaks from PTAA are red-shifted as a result of the chain entanglement in PTAA during the evaporation of the residual solvent. The crystallization speed could be estimated from the onset points of absorption shift both in soluble acene and PTAA peaks. At the diF−TES ADT/PTAA blend films spin-casting for 50 s, the solution-to-solid transition occurs between 8 and 9 min, while the blend films spin-casting for 80 s exhibit the transition between 6.5 and 7.5 min (Figure 2a). On the other hand, at the TIPS–pentacene/PTAA blend films for 50 s, the transition occurs between 13 and 14 min, and at the 80 s spin-casting, the transition occurs between 10 and 11 min (Figure 2b). Since a blend film spin-cast for 80 s contains less residual solvent than that of one spin-cast for 50 s, the crystallization speed is faster for the former. In other words, the 80 s samples exhibit faster onset times for the crystallization of soluble acene, compared to the 50 s samples.

Comparing the two types of blends, diF−TES ADT in PTAA showed a faster crystallization rate than TIPS–pentacene in PTAA. It has been reported that F−F and F−S interaction can boost the crystallization speed of diF−TES ADT molecules.[15] To support this assumption, the phase transitions on liquid–solid–crystal states of diF–TES ADT and TIPS–pentacene were studied by extracting the ΔHcrst. (Enthalpy of crystallization) from DSC thermogram and PBE-D3 calculation (Figure 2c–e). Here, the transition from liquid (that is, free molecular state) to solid was measured by DSC, and the transition from liquid to crystal was calculated using the DFT modeling (Figure S7 and Tables S1,S2, Supporting Information). We suggest that the crystallization speed can be determined when the molecules in the liquid state form a solid state under solvent evaporation. Moreover, the difference of ΔH(liquid→solid) between diF–TES ADT and TIPS–pentacene is larger than that of ΔH(liquid→crystal), which means that ΔH(liquid→solid) governs the crystallization rate. According to the linear free energy relation model, if the reaction is thermodynamically stable, it is also kinetically favorable (that is, fast). In other words, as standard reaction Gibbs energy becomes more negative on going from TIPS–pentacene to diF–TES ADT, the activation Gibbs energy decreases, and the rate constant under liquid-to-solid transition increases (Figure S8, Supporting Information). To this end, the small amount of residual solvent resulting from prolonged spin-casting from 50 to 80 s is enough for the phase separation and crystallization of diF−TES ADT in PTAA. From the kinetic analysis, the relatively long optimum spin-coating time (80 s) for diF−TES ADT/PTAA blend compared to 50 s for TIPS–pentacene/PTAA blend can be rationalized, and the crystallization behavior of each soluble acene can be understood from the aspect of self-assembly under solvent evaporation.

Figure 3a,b represent the schematics of the film formation process in the spin-cast diF−TES ADT/PTAA and TIPS–pentacene/PTAA blends, respectively. When the soluble acene/PTAA blend solution is cast on the SiO2/Si substrate, the molecular self-assembly, including phase separation and crystallization, is accompanied by solvent evaporation. At this time, the thermodynamic parameters (e.g., surface energy, solubility) and kinetic parameters (e.g., crystallization rate) determine the final film morphology after phase separation. In the diF−TES ADT/PTAA blend, there are significant differences in the solubility and surface tension between the two components. Note that the diF−TES ADT molecule has lower solubility and surface energy than PTAA. The solubility-driven solidification allows the preferential formation of the diF−TES ADT-dominant layer (that is, 1st thin layer at the interface with the SiO2 substrate). In contrast, surface tension-driven solidification prefers the opposite trend. The difference in surface tension causes Marangoni flow in the pseudo-liquid phase, thereby leading to substantial floating of diF−TES ADT molecules to the air–film interface. Here, we suggested that the competition between the two driving forces generated by Marangoni instability and the fast crystallization rate of diF−TES ADT under surface segregation enable the formation of via hole structure in the PTAA middle layer. Accordingly, the sandwich structure with crater-like via hole structure, diF−TES ADT (top) / PTAA with many via holes + diF−TES ADT (middle) / diF−TES ADT (bottom) was constructed (Figure 3c). On the other hand, in the TIPS–pentacene/PTAA blend film, the surface energy and solubility between TIPS–pentacene and PTAA are not largely different, and thus the preferential segregation of TIPS–pentacene at the film–substrate interfaces is not facilitated. In addition, the crystallization rate of the TIPS–pentacene is slow, which impedes the movement of the TIPS–pentacene molecules for phase segregation and crystallization. In particular, in the TIPS–pentacene/PTAA blend, both components exhibit similar solubility and surface tension, which means a lack of thermodynamics driving force for phase separation in the pseudo-liquid phase. Accordingly, the components of TIPS–pentacene and PTAA are dispersed in solid-state film, as shown in the schematic in Figure 3d, and this structure is consistent with the morphological and structural characterizations. In the following sections, we discuss the relationship between these morphological/structural characteristics, and the device performance of FETs and gas sensors.

Details are in the caption following the image
Figure 3
Open in figure viewer
PowerPoint
Schematic illustration of the evaporation-induced molecular assemblies of the a) diF−TES ADT/PTAA and b) TIPS–pentacene/PTAA blend films. The schematic structures of the c) diF−TES ADT/PTAA and d) TIPS–pentacene/PTAA blend films.
To compare the electrical properties of FETs based on soluble acene/PTAA blends, Au source/drain electrodes were deposited on the blend films, and the transfer and output characteristics of the bottom-gate FETs were measured (Figure 4a; Figure S9, Supporting Information). The FETs based on the diF−TES ADT/PTAA blends exhibit much higher electrical performance than those of the TIPS–pentacene/PTAA blends. Table 2 lists the field-effect mobilities of the devices at the saturation regime and on/off current ratios extracted from the transfer curves. The devices based on diF−TES ADT/PTAA blends exhibit average field-effect mobility of 0.26 ± 0.06 cm2 V−1 s−1. The devices based on TIPS–pentacene/PTAA blends show an average mobility of 0.007±0.003 cm2 V−1 s−1. The on/off current ratios are (105 and 104) for the diF−TES ADT blend devices and TIPS–pentacene blend devices, respectively. Similarly, the on current in the output curve is ≈2 orders of magnitude higher in the diF−TES ADT/PTAA blend device, than in the TIPS–pentacene/PTAA blend device (Figure S9, Supporting Information). The higher electrical performance in the diF−TES ADT/PTAA blends is attributed to the connectivity of the crystals (Figure S1a, Supporting Information), the distinct phase-separation between diF−TES ADT and PTAA (Figure 1e), and the high degree of crystal perfection (Figure 1g). Notably, the segregation of diF−TES ADT at the film–substrate interface is extremely beneficial for the lateral charge transport at the active channel. On the other hand, poor electrical properties in the TIPS–pentacene/PTAA blend devices are caused by the combined effects from the incomplete phase separation (Figure 1f), and the low crystalline order in the TIPS–pentacene phase (Figure 1h). Although the electrical properties of the TIPS–pentacene/PTAA blend device are inferior to those of the diF−TES ADT/PTAA blend devices, the obtained maximum field-effect mobility (0.01 cm2 V−1 s−1) is two orders of magnitude higher than the 0.0001 cm2 V−1 s−1 obtained from the PTAA FETs (Figure S10a and Table S3, Supporting Information). We speculate that TIPS–pentacene molecules in the blend film are percolated along the lateral direction, and this pathway additionally contributes to the lateral transport of charge carriers. For this reason, the selective etching of TIPS–pentacene in the blend film resulted in the complete absence of current in the operation of FETs (Figure S11, Supporting Information). However, after the selective removal of diF−TES ADT, the matrix PTAA with via hole structure in the diF−TES ADT/PTAA blend maintains its structure, and thus its electrical performance is similar to that of PTAA FETs (Figure S11 and Table S4, Supporting Information). Although higher electrical properties of the diF−TES ADT/PTAA blend film were previously reported in top-gate structure,[6] our bottom-gate device employing the blend film is extremely beneficial in the application of gas sensors, as demonstrated in the following section.

Details are in the caption following the image
Figure 4
Open in figure viewer
PowerPoint
Electrical properties of the OFETs devices. Plots of a) −ID, and (−ID)1/2, versus VG, for the OFETs based on the blend films. VD is fixed at −80 V. Device performances are maximized at the optimized spin coating time of 80 s in the diF−TES ADT/PTAA blend film, and 50 s in the TIPS–pentacene/PTAA blend film. Dynamic gas-sensing analyses of the OFET-based gas sensors of the b) diF−TES ADT and c) TIPS–pentacene/PTAA blend films, under the periodic exposures of NO2, SO2, CO2, and NH3 analytes and purging gas (N2). d) and e) The calculated responses from (b) and (c). During the gas sensing tests, VGS and VDS were fixed at −20 and −10 V, respectively. Optimized binding states of f) NO2 and g) NH3 gas analytes on PTAA determined from DFT calculation. Schematic of the gas sensing mechanism of the OFETs based on the h) diF−TES ADT/PTAA and i) TIPS–pentacene/PTAA blend films.
Table 2. Electrical characteristics of the bottom gate – top contact FETs based on diF−TES ADT/PTAA and TIPS–pentacene/PTAA blend films
Blend series	Spin time [s]	Max µFET [cm2 V−1 s−1]	Avg. µFET [cm2 V−1 s−1]	VTha) [V]	IOn/IOff
diF−TES ADT/PTAA	80	0.32	0.26 ± 0.06	−6.5 ± 1.4	>105
TIPS–pentacene/PTAA	50	0.01	0.007 ± 0.003	−5.4 ± 5.1	>104
a) VTh is a threshold voltage.
In this experiment, two conjugated small molecules with different molecular structures (i.e., diF−TES ADT and TIPS–pentacene) were blended with amorphous PTAA, and the spin-cast blend films exhibit unique microstructures that determine the electrical properties of the FETs. The gas-sensing properties of OFETs are also affected by the film microstructure, as well as the molecular structure of active semiconducting materials. Figure 4b–e shows the gas sensing properties of FETs based on the diF−TES ADT/PTAA and TIPS–pentacene/PTAA blend films. The change of source–drain current was monitored in a time-dependent manner under the source–drain bias of −10 V and gate bias of −20 V. Here, the sensing capabilities of the target gases were determined by analyzing the ratio of the initial current (IDS (0)) to the time-dependent current (IDS (t)) when the target gases were injected into the FET devices. The following equation calculated the responses to the target gases:
 
(2)
The response mechanism of OFET gas sensors can be explained by the current change upon the adsorption of dipolar gases with an electron-withdrawing or donating character. For example, when the NO2 and SO2 molecules are adsorbed and penetrate the semiconducting layer near the gate–dielectric, extra hole carriers are generated by the electron-withdrawing characteristics of gas molecules, and the hole carrier density increases accordingly. On the other hand, the response mechanism of NH3 with electron-donating character is totally in contrast to the XO2 gas mentioned above: NH3 molecules with electron-donating character present in the active channel decrease the hole carrier density.[4, 16] The cross-sensitivity was measured by flowing various target gases (e.g., NO2, SO2, CO2, NH3) periodically (Figure 4b,c). The diF−TES ADT/PTAA gas sensor exhibits an excellent response toward NO2, whereas it responds very poorly to the other gas analytes. On the other hand, the TIPS–pentacene/PTAA gas sensor both exhibited considerable response toward NO2[17] and showed moderate responses to other gas analytes (i.e., SO2, CO2, NH3). Figure 4d,e summarize the response of each gas analyte. When we calculated the limit of detection (LOD) of the diF−TES ADT and TIPS–pentacene/PTAA gas sensors from the linear fit of the response at various concentrations of NO2, LOD values of 0.92 and 1.69 ppm were obtained, respectively (Figure S12a, Supporting Information). The diF−TES ADT/PTAA gas sensor shows superior NO2 sensing capability to that of the TIPS−pentacene/PTAA gas sensor at high concentrations, as well as at low concentrations (Figure S12a, Supporting Information). This observation suggests that the crater-like morphology of diF−TES ADT crystals and PTAA matrix with a bunch of holes promote the penetration of NO2 molecules into the active channel near the gate dielectric.[18] The long-term NO2 response behaviors of the two types of gas sensors were further compared by flowing NO2 (Figure S12b, Supporting Information). The diF−TES ADT/PTAA gas sensor exhibited a maximum response of 324%, while the response of TIPS–pentacene/PTAA sensor remains low (<20%) at NO2 exposure for 1500 s. It is clear that the via hole structure of diF−TES ADT/PTAA blend film is better than the intermixed structure of TIPS–pentacene/PTAA blend film, especially for the gas diffusion pathway at long-term gas exposure (Figure S12b, Supporting Information). The selective sensing characteristic of the diF−TES ADT/PTAA sensor toward NO2 also originates from the unique phase-separated blend structure. We confirmed that the use of a single component (e.g., diF−TES ADT, TIPS–pentacene, PTAA) as an active layer in FET resulted in a substantial NH3 response, as well as NO2 response (Figure S13, Supporting Information). Thus, in this single-component system, the response from NO2 could not be extracted from the current change in mixed gas conditions. However, PTAA has substantial effect on the sensing mechanism of the gas sensors based on diF−TES ADT/PTAA and TIPS−pentacene/PTAA. In the diF−TES ADT/PTAA blend film, the via hole structure of PTAA at the middle layer could limit the inter-diffusion of NH3 to the active diF−TES ADT channel. We speculate that the nitrogen moiety in PTAA induces repulsion toward NH3, thereby reducing the inter-diffusion possibility. To support our arguments for selective gas sensing capability, we calculated the binding energy between gas analytes (e.g, NO2 and NH3) and PTAA molecules. When we calculated the most energetically stable binding states of NO2 and NH3 to the PTAA molecule, in the case of NO2, the binding energy with PTAA is 0.24 eV. The binding energy between NH3 and PTAA, on the other hand, is only 0.18 eV. Additionally, interatomic distance between nitrogen in NH3 and nitrogen in PTAA is 4.8 Å, whereas the distance between nitrogen in NO2 and nitrogen in PTAA is 3 Å (Figure 4f,g). As reasons for this result, the nitrogen in NH3 is farther apart from the nitrogen in PTAA by the repulsion between the lone pair electrons, whereas the nitrogen in NO2 is partially positively charged and thus electrostatic attraction between electron deficient NO2 and electron rich PTAA molecule results in a shortened interatomic distance. The calculated results support our hypotheses regarding the gas sensing mechanism by the two different phase-separated structures (e.g., via hole structure in diF-TES ADT/PTAA blend and mixed structure in TIPS-pentacene/PTAA blend). Although repulsion between NH3 and PTAA dominates low inter-diffusion of NH3, adsorption of NH3 onto PTAA is still possible. Since pristine PTAA FET shows low field-effect mobility with low density of charge carriers (Figure S10 and Table S3, Supporting Information), it could exhibit substantial response even at the low NH3 adsorption. In the via-hole structure of the diF−TES ADT/PTAA blend, however, active channel lies at the bottom diF-TES ADT layer, and eventually, gas molecules should inter-diffuse into the PTAA middle layer through the via holes (Figure 4h). Therefore, fewer NH3 analytes can pass through the via holes, mainly due to the repulsion between NH3 and PTAA. Meanwhile, the low selectivity of the TIPS–pentacene/PTAA gas sensor might be due to the mixed structure of two components in the active layer (Figure 4i). In this blend system, TIPS–pentacene is not clearly phase-separated at the semiconductor–dielectric interface. Rather, the active channel in the TIPS–pentacene/PTAA blend is the intermixed layer, which contrasts with the diF−TES ADT/PTAA blend system having the phase-separated diF−TES ADT channel at the bottom.

To examine the different sensing mechanisms of the two blend systems, the field-effect mobility, threshold voltage, and on-current were monitored by measuring the transfer curve upon injection of NO2 sequentially from 0 to 100 ppm (Figure S14 and Table S5, Supporting Information). Exposure to NO2 in both devices leads to a significant shift in the threshold voltage toward positive voltage (namely, an increase in on current), as a result of the increase in hole carrier density. However, the field-effect mobilities exhibited different characteristics depending on the blend type. The diF−TES ADT/PTAA sensors showed a gradual increase of field-effect mobility with increasing concentration, which might be due to the trap-filling behaviors in polycrystalline semiconducting film.[19] On the other hand, the TIPS–pentacene/PTAA sensor showed an initial increase in field-effect mobility; however, at high concentrations, the mobility substantially decreased. This implies that the TIPS–pentacene/PTAA device starts to operate abnormally, possibly due to the influence of excess hole carriers accumulated in the active channel. We speculate that when a high concentration of gas is absorbed on the blend film, the irregular arrangement of TIPS–pentacene and PTAA in the active layer acts as an obstacle to the transport of charge carriers. Further study is underway to resolve this issue.

3 Conclusion
In this report, diF−TES ADT/PTAA and TIPS–pentacene/PTAA blends were used as active layers for OFETs and associated gas sensors. The phase separation and structure after spin-coating the blend solutions were extensively studied by POM, AFM, and ToF-SIMS. In the diF−TES ADT/PTAA blend film, the diF−TES ADT is segregated at the air–film and film–substrate interface, thereby forming a tri-layer structure (of diF−TES ADT-top/PTAA + diF−TES ADT-middle/diF−TES ADT-bottom). In particular, via hole structure was formed at the middle layer. On the other hand, in the TIPS–pentacene/PTAA blend film, the two phases are not completely phase-separated in the blend film, and are uniformly mixed. The difference in phase separation depending on the type of soluble acene led to a significant difference in the molecular arrangement of soluble acene, as confirmed by 2D-GIXD. Here, in the diF−TES ADT/PTAA blend, highly ordered diF−TES ADT crystals were formed, whereas the TIPS–pentacene/PTAA blend resulted in a poorly ordered structure of TIPS–pentacene. The unique phase-separated structure in the diF−TES ADT/PTAA blend was attributed to differences in surface energy, solubility, and crystallization rate caused by F−F or F−S interaction in the diF−TES ADT. The maximum field-effect mobility of the FETs based on diF−TES ADT/PTAA was 0.32 cm2 V−1 s−1, and the associated gas sensor showed sensitive and selective sensing characteristics toward NO2 analyte. In particular, the Marangoni flow driven via hole structure was advantageous for enhancing the diffusion of target NO2 gas, while reducing its affinity with other gases, such as NH3. On the other hand, the force that induces phase separation between TIPS–pentacene and PTAA is weak, because of the smaller surface energy difference, and the slow crystallization rate of TIPS–pentacene. As a result, the grain boundary density and misorientation in the TIPS–pentacene crystallite were high in the TIPS–pentacene/PTAA blend film. The FETs based on TIPS–pentacene/PTAA blend film exhibited field-effect mobilities of 0.01 cm2 V−1 s−1 or less, and moderate responses toward various gas analytes (i.e., NO2, SO2, CO2, NH3), due to the mixed structure of two components in the active channel. We proposed that controlling the phase separation in the blend system by adopting an appropriate type of soluble acene could be an effective way to improve the device performance of FETs and the corresponding gas sensor.

4 Experimental Section
Materials and Device Fabrication
2,8-difluoro-5,11-bis(triethylsilylethynyl) anthradithiophene (diF−TES ADT) and 6,13-bis(triisopropylsilylethynyl) pentacene (TIPS–pentacene) were synthesized and provided by the Anthony groups, with support from the National Science Foundation under Cooperative Agreement No. 1 849 213. Poly(triaryl amine) (PTAA) was purchased from Ossila, and 1,2-dichlorobenzene was purchased from Sigma Aldrich Co. A silicon wafer containing thermally grown SiO2 (thickness of 300 nm) was purchased from Fine Science. The diF−TES ADT/PTAA (1:1 w/w) blended solutions (20 mg mL−1) and TIPS–pentacene/PTAA (1:1 w/w) blended solutions (20 mg mL−1) were spin-cast onto the SiO2/Si substrates at 1000 rpm s−1 for 80 and 50 s, respectively (at room temperature (RT), and in ambient air). After the spin coating was completed, the samples were immediately placed in separate Petri dishes, and wrapped with aluminum foil to prevent light illumination, and to induce slow evaporation of the solvent in ambient air. For the top-contact OFET devices, Au source–drain electrodes (channel length: 100 µm and width: 2000 µm) were thermally evaporated through a shadow mask. After the source and drain electrodes deposition, each device was electrically isolated by a mechanical scratch. The Ag wires at each source and drain electrodes were electrically wired to characterize the gas sensor. To selectively remove the diF−TES ADT and TIPS–pentacene layers, the diF−TES ADT/PTAA and TIPS–pentacene/PTAA blend films were immersed in n-hexane for one day.

Characterization
The soluble acene/PTAA blend films were characterized with Polarized-optical light microscopy (POM, Hirox, RH-2000) and atomic force microscopy (AFM, Park Scientific Instrument) to investigate their morphologies. The 2D-GIXD was recorded in the Pohang Accelerator Laboratory of Korea (3C beamline). ToF-SIMS (ION-ToF Münster) with ion beam sputter was used to confirm the vertical phase-separated structure of the blend films. The water contact angle of the pristine films was measured by a contact angle meter (SEO, Phoenix-MT (T)). The crystallization rate of the small molecules in the spin-cast blend solutions and the solubility of the pristine organic semiconductors were recorded by UV–vis spectroscopy (Agilent Technologies, CARY 60). The electrical properties of the FETs were scanned using a Keithley 4200-SCS connected to a probe station under vacuum conditions. To investigate the transfer curves, the gate voltage was swept from VGS = 20 to −80 V with the source–drain voltage at VDS = −80 V. Output characteristics were measured under the VDS from 0 to −80 V at various VGS of 0, −20, −40, −60, and −80 V. Gas sensing properties of the OFETs were measured using a gas chamber (Precision Sensor System Inc., GASENTEST) at fixed biases, VGS at −20 V, and VDS at −10 V. NO2, NH3, SO2, and CO2 were used as target gas molecules, and purging was conducted in the gas sensor setup with the N2.

Computational Calculation Details
These simulations for the optimized crystalline structure, adsorption of gas molecules, and enthalpy of soluble acenes were carried out with the density functional theory (DFT)[20] in the Vienna Ab initio Simulation Package (VASP) code with projector augmented wave (PAW)[21] method. The generalized gradient approximation (GGA) was used in the Perdew-Berke-Ernzerhof (PBE) scheme,[22] and the kinetic energy cut-off was 400 eV. To describe formation energy such as the vdW interaction accurately, the PBE-D3 method was employed.[23] This method was Grimme's approach to performing an empirical approximation using the dispersion coefficient. Geometry optimization of the structure was carried out until the Hellmann-Feynman force acting on each atom was <0.01 eV/Å. The enthalpy changes (ΔH) in the crystallization reaction were obtained by determining the difference in the volume and energy of a molecule between the volume and energy per cell of the crystal.

Supporting Information for Adv. Funct. Mater., DOI: 10.1002/adfm.202215215 Marangoni Flow Driven via Hole Structure of Soluble Acene–Polymer Blends for Selective Nitrogen Dioxide Sensing Jung Hun Lee, Seunghan Lee, Hoonkyung Lee, Hyun Ho Choi, Huijeong Chae, Youngnan Kim, Seok Joo Yang, John E. Anthony, Ho Won Jang, Sang Min Won, and Wi Hyoung Lee*Supporting Information for Marangoni Flow Driven Via Hole Structure of Soluble Acene–Polymer Blends for Selective Nitrogen Dioxide Sensing  Jung Hun Leea,b, Seunghan Lee c, Hoonkyung Lee c, Hyun Ho Choid, Huijeong Chaeb, Youngnan Kimb, Seok Joo Yange, John E. Anthonyf, Ho Won Janga, Sang Min Wong, and   Wi Hyoung Leeb,h* aDepartment of Materials Science and Engineering, Research Institute for Advanced Materials, Seoul National University, Seoul 08826, Republic of Korea bDepartment of Organic and Nano System Engineering, Konkuk University, Seoul 05029, Republic of Korea cDepartment of Physics, Konkuk University, Seoul 05029, Republic of Korea dDepartment of Materials Engineering and Convergence Technology, Gyeongsang National University, Jinju 52828, Republic of Korea eDavidson School of Chemical Engineering, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN 47907, USA  fCenter for Applied Energy Research, University of Kentucky, Lexington, 40511, USA gDepartment of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Sungkyunkwan University (SKKU), Suwon 16419, Republic of Korea hDivision of Chemical Engineering, Konkuk University, Seoul 05029, Republic of Korea * Corresponding author: Prof. Wi Hyoung Lee E-mail: whlee78@konkuk.ac.kr Figure S1. Polarized optical microscopy images of the (a) & (c) diF−TES ADT/PTAA and (b) & (d) TIPS–pentacene/PTAA blend films. The images were taken from the blend films (a) & (b) before etching the soluble acene, and (c) & (d) after etching the soluble acene with n-hexane.  Figure S2. AFM height images of the (a) diF−TES ADT/PTAA and (b) TIPSpentacene/PTAA blend films. The images were taken from the blend films after etching the soluble acene with n-hexane. The insets show the 3D surface topographies.   Figure S3. AFM phase images of (a) & (c) diF-TES ADT/PTAA and (b) & (d) TIPSpentacene/PTAA blend films. The surface images of the blend films (a) & (b) before etching, and (c) & (d) after etching the diF–TES ADT or TIPS–pentacene with n-hexane.  Figure S4. Contact angles of di-water on the pristine organic semiconductor films: (a) PTAA, (b) diF−TES ADT, and (c) TIPS–pentacene.     Figure S5. (a)–(c) The absorbances at λmax of the organic semiconductor solutions as a function of concentrations of the (a) PTAA, (b) diF−TES ADT, and (c) TIPS–pentacene solutions. UV-vis absorption spectra of the saturated solutions based on the (d) PTAA, (e) diF−TES ADT, and (f) TIPS–pentacene at different dilute solutions of (×300, ×400, and ×500). The insets in (a)–(c) show the UV-vis absorption spectra depending on the different concentrations of the organic semiconductor solutions. Figure S6. In situ UV-Vis absorption spectra of (a) & (e) diF−TES ADT/PTAA, and (f) & (g) TIPS–pentacene/PTAA blend films after spin-casting for (a) & (c) 50 s, and (b) & (d) 80 s, respectively. UV-Vis spectra were measured in a time-dependent manner directly after spincasting, and＊indicates the onset time of crystallization.  Figure S7. Differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) thermogram showing the crystallization and melting temperature of the soluble acenes: (a) diF-TES ADT, and (b) & (c) TIPSpentacene.  Table S1. Differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) information of the soluble acenes: (a) diFTES ADT, and (b) & (c) TIPS-pentacene.  Temp. Peak Soluble acene diF-TES ADT TIPS-pen Exo (Tc) Temp. (℃) 1 st 184.66 122.71 ∆ Hcrst. (J/g) 52.01 12.01 Temp. (℃) 2nd - 263.87 ∆ Hcrst. (J/g) - 28.76 Endo (Tm) Temp. (℃) 1 st 195.73 124.42 ∆ Hcrst. (J/g) 53.17 9.52 2nd Temp. (℃) - 262.10 ∆ Hcrst. (J/g) - 28.25 Table S2. Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof (PBE) modeling of the soluble acenes: diF-TES ADT, and TIPS-pentacene.  PBE-D3 TIPS-pen diF-TES ADT Crystal Volume per cell (A3) 896.25 857.27 Crystal Volume per cell (m3) 8.9625E-28 8.5727E-28 Molecule Volume (A3) 711.313 700.488 Molecule Volume (m3) 7.11313E-28 7.00488E-28 Molecule energy (eV) -607.43 -551.52 Crystal energy per cell (eV) -610.01 -554.07 dU per cell (eV) 2.572 2.548 dU per cell (J) 4.12E-19 4.08E-19 pdV per cell (Pa*m3 = J) 1.84937E-23 1.56782E-23 1 Molecule Mass (u) 638.654 684.738 dH per cell (J) 4.12018E-19 4.08016E-19 dH (J/g) 388.501 358.834    Figure S8. Linear free energy relation (LFER) model for reaction coordination of diF-TES ADT and TIPS-pentacene. Figure S9. Output characteristics of the OFETs based on the (a) diF−TES ADT/PTAA and (b) TIPS–pentacene/PTAA, blend films.   Figure S10. Polarized optical microscopy images of the pristine (a) PTAA, (b) diF−TES ADT, and (c) TIPS–pentacene films. Transfer characteristics of OFETs based on the pristine (d) PTAA, (e) diF−TES ADT, and (f) TIPS–pentacene films. Table S3. Electrical characteristics of bottom gate – top contact OFETs based on the pristine organic semiconductors.  Organic semiconductor µFET  (cm2 /Vs) a) VTh  (V) IOn/IOff PTAA 0.00011 −3.3 4.3 × 103 diF−TES ADT 0.00454 0.6 3.4 × 105 TIPS−pentacene 0.00513 −0.9 3.9 × 104 a) VTh is a threshold voltage Figure S11. (a) & (b) Transfer curves of OFETs after etching the diF−TES ADT and TIPSpentacene layer from the blend films. Transfer curve of OFETs based on the pristine PTAA is also shown for comparision. Schematics of the (c) diF−TES ADT/PTAA and (d) TIPSpentacene/PTAA blend films, after etching the diF−TES ADT or the TIPS–pentacene phase. Table S4. Electrical properties of OFETs after etching the diF−TES ADT, TIPS–pentacene of the blended films, and OFETs based on the pristine PTAA. OSC µFET  (cm2 /Vs) VTh  (V) IOn/IOff diF−TES ADT 0.00007  17.41 > 102 TIPS−pentacene -  - - PTAA 0.00010  −3.25 > 102 Figure S12. (a) Linear fits showing the relative responses of the source–drain current (ΔID/I0) as a function of the NO2 concentration. (b) Long-term NO2 response behaviors of the FETs based on diF−TES ADT/PTAA and TIPS−pentacene/PTAA blend films. During the gas sensing tests, VGS and VDS were fixed at (−20 and −10) V, respectively. Figure S13. Sensing properties of the OFET-based gas sensor with the pristine (a) PTAA, (b) diF−TES ADT, and (c) TIPS−pentacene. ID versus time curves of OFET-based gas sensors operated under the periodic exposure of NO2, SO2, CO2, and NH3 analytes and purging gas (N2). During the gas sensing tests, VGS and VDS were fixed at (−20 and −10) V, respectively. Figure S14. Transfer characteristics of the OFET-based gas sensors with (a) diF−TES ADT/PTAA and (b) TIPS−pentacene/PTAA blend films depending on the different NO2 concentrations. VDS was fixed at −20 V.  Table S5. Electrical characteristics of the bottom gate – top contact OFET-based gas sensors with diF−TES ADT/PTAA, TIPS−pentacene/PTAA blend films, depending on the different NO2 concentrations.  Blend series Spin time  (s) Concentation (ppm) µFET (cm2/Vs) VTh  (V) On-current (A) diF−TES ADT / PTAA 80 0 0.15114 2.18 6.7 × 10-6 30 0.19113 2.62 8.8 × 10-6 50 0.30537 15.1 3.3 × 10-5 70 0.35769 17.7 4.4 × 10-5 100 0.40871 22.6 6.4 × 10-5 TIPS−pentacene / PTAA 50 0 0.00987 11.4 7.9 × 10-7 30 0.01115 18.0 1.3 × 10-6 50 0.01005 22.0 1.4 × 10-6 70 0.00853 25.4 1.4 × 10-6 100 0.00664 32.7 1.5 × 10-6