We use essential cookies to make sure the site can function. We also use optional cookies for advertising, personalisation of content, usage analysis, and social media.

By accepting optional cookies, you consent to the processing of your personal data - including transfers to third parties. Some third parties are outside of the European Economic Area, with varying standards of data protection.

See ourprivacy policyfor more information on the use of your personal data.

Manage preferencesfor further information and to change your choices.

Advertisement

Access provided by Argonne Research Library

754Accesses

4Citations

Explore all metrics

MXenes are two-dimensional materials that are attractive for applications as sensors because they possess high conductivity, super hydrophilicity and high surface area. There already exist substantial researches on the use of Ti3C2Txbased MXenes as electrochemical biosensors, but in contrast Ti2CTXbased MXenes are rarely discussed due to their inherent resistance instability. However, the use of Ti2CTXbased MXenes is still worth exploring as theoretical studies have shown that Ti2CTXpossesses a significantly lower bandgap compared to many other MXenes structures. Herein, this study examines the use of Ti2CTXMXene structures in a P-channel ion-sensitive field-effect transistor (P-ISFET) for the detection of Chlorpyrifos (Cpy). Compositing the PEDOT:PSS thin film with delaminated Ti2CTXMXenes flakes with graphene oxide (GO) and bovine serum albumin (BSA) allows it to maintain its sheet resistance at around 100 kOhm for 3 days. Interestingly when using the composite thin film, the minimum threshold voltage required to observe Cpy electroreduction is −0.1 V. This is much lower than that when using titanium dioxide (TiO2), which is −1.5 V. Composite thin films containing Ti2CTXMXene are found to detect Cpy with higher sensitivity compared to thin films without MXene. This is because the presence of Mxene in the PEDOT:PSS composite thin films improves the surface area available for Cpy detection. This study highlights the potential of Ti2CTxMXene-BSA composite as a promising 2D material for enzyme-free CPY detection.

Avoid common mistakes on your manuscript.

Conductive polymer (CP) such poly(3,4-ethlenedioxythiophene):poly(styrene sulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS), poly(aniline) (PA) and poly(pyrrole) (PPY) has been applied as electrode for organic transistor[1], dye-sensitized solar cells [2,3,4,5], sensors and energy storage for several decades [6,7,8,9,10,11]. Pristine PEDOT:PSS electrode has a very low conductivity. Based on a recent review, the conductivity of PEDOT:PSS can be enhanced by three orders magnitude by thermal treatments, acid treatments, solvent treatment or by increasing the molecular weight [1,3,4]. Beside, dual-colloid interface co-assembly strategy had been shown to engineer hollow mesoporous CP for high-energy–density solid-state planar microsupercapacitor (MSCs) whilst conductive gel polymer electrolyte (CGPE) had shown high potential for stable and safe lithium or sodium batteries [5,11]. Other review had shown that the photovoltaic (PV) that utilizing PEDOT-based counter electrode had produced better efficiency than those of platinum (Pt)-based counter electrode due to improvement in catalytic and charge transfer, respectively [7,8]. This study focus on increasing PEDOT:PSS surface area, conductivity, sensitivity and stability for bio sensing application through 2D material additive. To date, many researchers have made dramatic breakthroughs in achieving high-conductive polymer composites by the introduction of 2D material in the polymer composite network such as graphene, reduced graphene oxide (RGO), boron nitride and recently using MXenes [10,11,12,13,14,15,16,17,18,19]. Compared to the other 2D materials, Mxenes are very attractive due to more versatility in terms of dispersion capability and stability in various solvents [20,21].

MXenes are 2D materials with a general formula Mn+1XnTx, where M is an early transition metal, X is a carbon and/or nitrogen wheren= 1, 2 or 3 and Txis a surface termination functional group (−O, −OH, −F) [22]. MXenes are typically produced from their precursor MAX phases by etching away the A content where A is an element from group 13 or 14. In general, MXenes behaviour is metal-like; they exhibit high electrical conductivity, good hydrophilicity (due to − OH or –F surfaces) and excellent mechanical properties. The structure of MXenes provides a highly negative-charged surface area, depending on the intercalation distance between the layers. Their basic structure consists of a multi-stacked layer after delamination which may limit their electrochemical performance. Thus, surface modification of MXenes is crucial for enhancing the intercalation distance between their layers. Previous experimental and theoretical studies have shown that the lighter structures of M2X compared to the M3X2and M4X3also have the highest gravimetric capacities. Thus, it can be surmised that the high surface area and conductivity of these structures are correlated to the MXenes being lighter or having a lower number of atomic layers [23,24,25]. The distance between Ti−C atomic layers for Ti2CTx was found to be larger than that for Ti3C2Txby 0.53 Å [26]. Besides, Ti2C also has shown high methane adsorptive properties compared to Ti3C2[26]. Lai et al. revealed that Ti2CTxpossesses excellent electronic properties and electrocatalytic activity, which are deemed as promising for electrochemistry applications [27]. Recently, Ti2CTxstructures have also shown high gas adsorption capabilities [28,29,30,31]. Another application of Ti2CTxis uranium removal via a sorption-reduction, which has been demonstrated for over a wide pH range. A lot of Ti3C2Txbased MXene electrochemical sensors and biosensors have been explored. Yet, Ti2CTxbased sensors are still less reported [32,33,34,35].

Chlorpyrifos [O,O-diethyl O-(3,5,6-trichloro-2-pyridinyl)-phosphorothioate] (Cpy) is an organophosphate pesticide, which is extensively used in domestic and agricultural industries to control various insects and pests [36]. Cpy is lipophilic and exerts toxicity. It can also bind irreversibly to cells and trigger their death after long-term exposure. Thus, the development of a sensor for Cpy detection is critical in ensuring environmental safety. Many industrial and agricultural areas use Cpy as pest control, and may thus contaminate nearby water resources [37].

The ion-selective field-effect transistor (ISFET) is a transducer, which is a combination of solution and transistor [38,39,40]. ISFET has been popular applied for bio sensors and agricultural soil analysis [40,41,42]. This work studies the potential of enzyme-free Ti2CTXMXene composite thin films in ISFET structure for Cpy detection. A proper study investigation on the use of standalone MXene Ti2CTXthin film for environmental detection applications is not present yet due to the poor contact between flakes caused by MXene ink being too dilute, ease of oxidation in the presence of oxygen and water, and inability to be annealed at high temperature as the flakes can easily restack [43]. Besides, most of 2D nanomaterial using ISFET sensor requires enzyme immobilization for electrochemical bio sensing application [40,41,42,43,44,45]. Modification of the MXene surface is a promising strategy to enhance the sensitivity (enhances the surface area), selectivity (using protein binder) and sheet resistance stability (introduces protective capacitive layers). Recently, the Ti2CTx MXene − graphene ISFET sensor had been studied for virus sensing and had shown excellent performance of the developed sensor due to the large number of surface-terminating groups of MXene [43,44,45]. This study investigates the effects of Ti2CTxMXene surface modification, in order to synthesize enzyme-free MXene composite thin film with high surface area and stable conductivity for Cpy detection. The main objective of this study is to modify the surface of MXene to overcome its resistance instability, to enhance the d-spacing, to maintain a high surface area, to enhance MXene flake colloidal stability and to produce good conductivity. The strategy to modify the MXene surface is by intercalating MXene layer with GO flakes. This will be expected to improve conductivity and stability simultaneously between flakes. The GO flakes, bound within the MXene interlayers, are expected to enhance the MXene interlayer distance by electrostatic interactions. In addition, previous studies have shown that hybrid MXene-GO composites have better mechanical strength [47].

BSA is widely used as a model binding protein for many bio-related applications. It is known to bind to various substances such as fatty acids, hormones and drugs, and it is cheap and commercially available compared to other types of albumin [48]. BSA consists of 583 amino acid residues in a single polypeptide chain. It is a globular protein, which comprises of three homologous domains, namely domain I, II and III. Each domain is further divided into two sub-domains, A and B [49,50,51]. The protein comprises hydrophilic and hydrophobic residues that are beneficial for adsorption of various scaffold materials, depending on the polarity of the scaffold [52]. The interaction between GO and BSA has been reported to involve various noncovalent forces such as the hydrophobic force, hydrogen bonds, van der Waals and π stacking interactions [53]. At pH 7.0, 30% of the amino acid residues of BSA are charged; negatively charged residues include aspartic acid (Asp) and glutamic acid (Glu), and positively charged residue include lysines (Lys), histidines (His) and arginines (Arg) [54]. The charged surface of the BSA is mainly caused by the Lys and His amino acids [54,55]. Among the three homologous domains of BSA (domains I, II and III), domain III possesses more positively charged residues compared to the other two domains that are mostly negatively charged. Thus, the binding site for GO is preferably at domain III of BSA [53]. The dipole moment of BSA points towards the subdomain IIIB, which is slightly negative and relatively hydrophobic. This helps BSA to sufficiently bind to the negatively charged surface of MXene [54,56]. The involvement of both electrostatic and hydrophobic forces between the domain III BSA and MXene are suggested to be similar to the adsorption of silica oxide (SiO2) on to BSA [49]. Moreover, the Kavalue of Cpy and BSA interaction (0.3307 × 105M−1) indicates a moderate binding affinity, and hence an effective binding. Although domain II is negatively charged overall, the subdomain IIA retains its positive charged. Thus, it is proven that Cpy binds to subdomain IIA of BSA via electrostatic interactions [55]. Hence, it is confirmed that BSA proteins, bound to MXene surface, provide a protective capacitive layer for the MXene flake and enhance the physical adsorption of Cpy to MXene for Cpy detection. GO and MXene flakes are naturally hydrophilic, so they are expected to aggregate in the presence of hydrophobic BSA in water. Poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) polystyrene sulfonate (PEDOT:PSS) can have potential to produce electrostatic shielding for MXenes flakes which favours better charge transfer through PEDOT–MXenes conducting paths [57]. To overcome the aggregation problems, PEDOT:PSS polymer is used as a colloidal stabiliser to form a stable colloidal dispersion of hybrid MXene:GO:PEDOT:PSS with BSA immobilized on the MXene surface. The combination of these 2D materials (Mxene and GO) and conductive polymer (PEDOT:PSS) can preserve the conductivity stability of MXene for a long period.

As earlier mentioned, there have been plenty of studies that have been conducted on Ti3C2Txas electrochemical biosensors compared to Ti2CTx[58]. Until recently, the study of Ti2CTxis focused on molecular separation, metal ion adsorption, catalytic electrode for lithium ion batteries and supercapacitors [59,60,61,62]. However, there have been no theoretical or experimental studies of Ti2CTxMXene binding with BSA protein, GO and PEDOT:PSS based material for Cpy sensing application reported to date [63]. This is because Ti2CTxMXene easily oxidises, which leads to loss of material conductivity [40,61]. Previous study had shown that the pore structure of Ti3C2TxMXene and it interaction with PEDOT:PSS as conductive polymer had led to high ion mobility and ensured rapid charge transfer [64,65]. Best of our knowledge, most of presented MXenes as conductive polymer composite is by utilising additive of Ti3C2TxMXene and there is no study on PEDOT:PSS interaction with Ti2CTXMXene [64,65,66,67]. Hence, this paper introduces a pioneering study of PEDOT:PSS and Ti2CTXMXene as a composite thin film with stable resistance for Cpy detection. This MXene thin film is used in a P-channel ISFET system for Cpy detection. The conductivity instability problem of Ti2CTXMXene is overcome through GO-PEDOT:PSS interaction and BSA binding. In addition, a negative bias (P-channel type) at the gate is newly introduced for Cpy detection to prevent the degradation of Ti2CTXMXene by the oxidation.

Titanium dioxide (TiO2)-based electrochemical reduction for Cpy detection has shown to have a limit of detection (LOD) value in the range of 4.4–11.8 µM−1[63]. TiO2based material was found to require a reduction potential of −1.5 V for Cpy detection. The bandgap of TiO2based materials was in the range of 3.2 eV for anatase, 3.0 eV for rutile and 3.3 eV for brookite structures. The bandgap of Ti2CTXMXenes was found to be much lower than TiO2with a value range of 0.17–0.92 eV depending on the termination functional group [35,65,66,67,68,69]. Hence, Ti2CTXMXenes are expected to result in a lower LOD and require a lower Cpy reduction potential compared to TiO2. In this study, MXene Ti2CTXcomposite thin films of P-ISFET are investigated to detect Cpy in water (pH 7). The Cpy detection depends on the adsorption mechanism and reduction reaction at the MXene Ti2CTXcomposite thin films as the sensing gate. The P-channel type of ISFET is selected to avoid oxidation of MXene film. This study is expected to give new perspectives on the development of polymer base biosensor using Ti2CTxMXene 2D materials.

MAX phase powder of Ti2AlC was commercially purchased from Advanced 2D Materials co. ltd., Beijing, China. 49% hydrofluoric acid (HF) was obtained from Merck, Germany and ethanol (98%) was of analytical grade. Commercial bovine serum albumin (BSA) with 98% purity (nuclease and protease free), graphene oxide (GO) solution dispersed in water with density 4 mg/ml, 1.3 w% of poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) polystyrene sulfonate (PEDOT:PSS) dispersed in water and SU-8 negative photoresist laminated film and resist developer were all obtained from Sigma-Aldrich, USA. Indium doped tin oxide (ITO) transparent conductive glass with sheet resistance of 10 Ohm/square is obtained from Zhuhai Kaivo Optoelectronic Co.Ltd. Chlorpyrifos (Cpy)​ 21.2% solution brand Plasbon 250 was commercially obtained from Shopee.

1 g of Ti2AlC MAX phase powder was dispersed in 20 mL solution of a 49% HF and stirred for 24 h at room temperature, 25 °C. Ti2AlC was etched by HF to form Ti2CTxsediment. The sediment was neutralized using deionized water until pH 6 and centrifuged at 3500 rpm for 5 min. The supernatant or exfoliated Ti2C (ex-Ti2CTx) was dried in an oven, at 80 °C for 12 h.

Intercalation or delamination of 0.8 g of ex-Ti2CTxpowder was done in 20 mL of 95% ethanol solution by ultrasonication for 24 h. Then the sample was dried in an oven, at 80 °C for 12 h to obtain nanosheets of delaminated MXene (d-Ti2CTx).

5 mg of d-Ti2CTxnanosheets was dispersed in 5 ml water solution that contains 4 mg/ml GO dispersion. Then the mixed solution was ultrasonicated for 1 h to functionalise the GO with d-Ti2CTXMXene via ultrasonic exfoliation. The GO flakes were expected to bind to MXene surface and within the MXene layers, at atomic interplanar distance. Then, the sonicated MXene:GO solution was ultrasonicated with 5 ml of PEDOT:PSS dispersed in water solution for 1 h to enhance MXene:GO dispersion stability. Finally, 5 ml of BSA with a density of 1 mg/ml were slowly added to the MXene:GO:PEDOT:PSS solution and ultrasonicated for 30 min to form homogenous MXene:GO:PEDOT:PSS:BSA colloidal solutions.

Figure1a shows the thin film ISFET preparation process. ITO glass was cleaned using dilute HCl, acetone, ethanol, isopropanol and DI water. Then, the ITO glass was laminated with SU-8 photoresist film on a hot plate, at 60 °C. A patterned shadow mask was placed on the laminated ITO, and then immersed in SU-8 developer solution and DI water for SU-8 pattern development. This patterned SU-8 on ITO glass was further exposed to UV-light to create a cavity along this pattern. 0.1 ml of MXene:BSA:GO:PEDOT:PSS colloidal solution was drop casted on the cavity of the glass, and annealed on a hot plate at 50 °C for 15 min to form MXene:BSA:GO:PEDOT:PSS thin film. After that the annealed film was further dried under high vacuumed, in argon flow, to remove excess solvent. Sputtered Au–Si–Pt electrode was bonded above SU-8 layer in a furnace at 95 °C for 15 min. Contacts for source, drain and reference were made by external Au probing to form Mxene:BSA:GO:PEDOT:PSS thin Film ISFET sensor, using platinum electrodes as external reference. The schematic diagram for the proposed and prepared device is shown in details in Fig.1b.

MXene:BSA:GO:PEDOT:PSS thin film ISFETafabrication process;bdevice schematic;cprepared device;ddevice design

The elemental composition of the Ti2AlC and d-Ti2CTxpowders was confirmed using X-ray diffraction (XRD) (PANalytical, Netherlands) with setting Cu κα X-ray source (λ = 1.54 Å) with a step size of 0.03°. Both Ti2AlC and d-Ti2CTxpowders were dispersed in water and drop-casted on silicon dioxide (SiO2) wafer for XRD analysis. The angle monitored 2θ was in the range of 5–80°. The analysis was done using HighScore Plus software and HighScore Database.

The surface morphology of the MXene based thin film before and after Cpy adsorption were acquired using JSM-7600F field emission scanning electron microscope (FE-SEM, JOEL, Tokyo, Japan) using an upper secondary electron imaging (SEI) detector. Cpy elements adsorbed on Mxene surface were confirmed using energy dispersive X-ray (EDX) (10 keV) coupled with an EMAX energy spectroscope (HORIBA, Ltd., Kyoto, Japan).

The contact angle of the thin film was measured using VCA Optima where the changes of the contact angle of the sample, in the function of time, were recorded with a frame rate of 10 frames per second for 500 s. The objective was to observe the adsorption rate of the modified MXene thin film and thin film without MXene. This will lead to the proper timescale selection and sample volume selection for the device testing.

The average thickness of the thin film prepared was measured using Surface profiler Bruker's Dektak® stylus profiler and analysed using Bruker’s Vision64 software.

First, both MAX phase and MXene flakes, drop-casted on SiO2were monitored using Park atomic force microscope to investigate their thickness and sizes. Then, the surface topology of MXene:BSA:GO:PEDOT:PSS thin films prepared was monitored before and after sensing to investigate the Cpy adsorption effect on the thin film surface morphology. The surface roughness analysis obtained was further correlated with the sheet resistance analysis using impedance spectroscopy analysis.

Raman spectra of the prepared thin film were obtained using a Raman spectroscope (Horiba Xplora Plus, USA) equipped with a 532 nm laser source, a 50 X magnification microscope objective and an electrically refrigerated charged-coupled device (CCD) camera. The objective was to observe the intensity and Raman shift effect of the interaction of the MXene and BSA content due to the active surface area enhancement.

Ten samples of MXene:BSA:GO:PEDOT:PSS thin film on Au patterned electrode, with 1 mm electrode separation and 1 mm × 1 mm active area, were measured to investigate the percentage difference of resistance prepared for all samples using impedance spectroscopy analysis. The impedance analyser used was Solatron 1260, using a frequency range of 15 MHz−0.1 mHz. From the Nyquist plot, the real and imaginary impedance were fitted using an equivalent circuit of contact resistor series with sheet resistor parallel with a constant phase element (CPE). The sheet resistance stability of the thin film prepared was investigated in the function of time at ambient condition. In addition, the prepared samples were also tested for physical adsorption with various molarities of Cpy. The physical adsorptions tests were done by dipping the prepare sample in CPY solution in function of time to investigate the effect of Cpy adsorption on the changes of thin film resistance.

Current versus voltage I–V curves (dependence of calibrated drain current, (IDS)—reference current, (IRef) on gate voltage VGate) were recorded using high-end Keysight Agilent B1500A semiconductor device parameter analyser (USA) and Lakeshore Model CPX cryogenic probe station. Mxene:BSA:GO:PEDOT:PSS and BSA:GO:PEDOT:PSS thin films of ISFET device were prepared for Cpy detection test, each concentration of four different thin film samples was tested three times. BSA:GO:PEDOT:PSS thin film was prepared as a control experiment to investigate the significance of MXene surface area compared to the thin film without MXene. The films were stored under vacuum condition before tested to maintain and standardise the sheet resistance stability in the range of 90–100 kohm. Different molarity of Cpy in distilled water were prepared from 0.01–100 µM. The VGatewas swept from 0 to −1.5 V and constant source-drain voltage of 0.25 V (VDS) was applied. IDSwas monitored and corrected based on IReffor 12,000 s. IDSgeneration for the sample without Cpy was measured five times using different samples to set the calibration point. The sensitivity was calculated from the current rate versus molarity. The limit of detection (LOD) was calculated from the calibration graph constructed with concentration of Cpy on thex-axis and current rates on they-axis using the relationships LOD = 3 s/m, where s is the standard deviation of the intercept and m is the slope of the calibration curve.

The electroanalytical technique to detect Cpy was based on Cpy adsorption, Cpy electroreduction and current response [60,64]. The ISFET consists of drain and source contacts that separated with the gate by parallel to the SU-8 patterned cavity that filled with test sample. The ISFET architecture is as shown in Fig.2. The gate functions as a capacitive layer to adsorb the Cpy via the physical adsorption when applied with negative electric potential [63,67]. For drain contact, constant voltage VDSwas applied for detection of current flow from the drain to source. The sensing gate was prepared using a volume control drop cast method of MXene composite colloidal solution on the ITO substrate. The gate can be easily cleaned or replaced whilst the drain, source and reference contacts, using an inert external electrode, were reusable. This study used 5 mm × 5 mm thin film active area for the ISFET gate with channel width and height of 5 mm and 3 µm, respectively. Au probing was used to create drain and source, which is separated from the gate by SU-8 photoresist layer with cavity, platinum electrode was used as a reference electrode. The drain and source separation was 5 mm. Upon placing a controlled volume of sample to the channel on the gate, the drain and source become conductive through the solution sample.

Proposed Ti2CTXMXene based thin film ISFET sensing mechanism

The sensing mechanism for Cpy sensing (as shown in Fig.2), using FET, was through the detection of changes from drain to source current (IDS) rate at transient state, after Cpy physical adsorption. The approach for Cpy detection is by monitoring the relative temporal change of IDSbased on reaction rate of H+ion at transient state [60]. The reactions, which produced current upon Cpy physical adsorption, were monitored. Once the negative potential is applied to the gate, Cpy reduction was activated. This created a capacitive effect for double layer formation near the gate. When the Cpy was adsorbed to the MXene composite thin film surface, the solution resistance and gate resistance increased, thus decreasing the current flow. Then, due to the negative potential applied to the gate, the reduction of Cpy by MXene composite produced current changes due to the electroreduction of –C = N of the pyridine ring of the Cpy via a 2e−transfer step and production of H+ion, as shown in Fig.2[65,66,67]. The IDSwas monitored as function of time, in order to carefully monitor the adsorption and reduction effect to the current detection timescale. In order to select the right sensing timescale, the contact angle analysis, as function of time, was measured, whilst the impedance method was used to clarify the effect of thin film resistance change after Cpy adsorption. Sensitivity analysis was proposed by taking the rate of current generation after the physical adsorption at a transient time in function of Cpy molarity, (A s−1M−1). The gradient of the current generation was expected to have a linear relation with the molarity of the Cpy in water at transient state before Mxene lost it stability.

Figure3a shows XRD analysis comparison between Ti2AlC MAX phase and synthesised d-Ti2CTx. Ti2AlC MAX phase and synthesised d-Ti2CTxXRD peaks showed good agreement with the database reference codes of ICSD 98-018-4886 and ICSD 98-007-7473 for Ti2CTxand Ti2AlC MAX phase, respectively. The delaminated MXene was successfully synthesised when the XRD peaks of dominant Ti2AlC MAX phase peaks disappeared at 41.708° and 12.879°, and appearance of new peak at 5.49° in the d-Ti2CTxXRD spectrum. The calculated d-spacing value for the d-Ti2CTxwas 16.37 Å which much larger than the d-spacing of the Ti2AlC MAX phase with d-spacing value of 6 Å. The MXene 2D state is further confirmed using Raman analysis, as shown in Fig.6. The Mxene Raman peaks at 266.46 cm−1, 423 cm−1, 523 cm−1and 601 cm−1showed successful synthesis of d-Ti2CTxfrom Ti2AlC MAX phase, which has a high intensity Raman shift at 601 cm−1. As shown in the AFM analysis (Fig.3b, c), the MXene flake shows an average maximum thickness of 75 nm, which was lower than the average maximum thickness of Ti2AlC MAX phase of 200 nm.

XRD analysis and AFM analysis ofaTi2AlC MAXphase andbTi2CTxMXene flakes on SiO2

Figure4shows FESEM analysis of prepared thin film of MXene with surface modification of GO, PEDOT:PSS and BSA. Figure4a shows pure MXene flakes with high stacking, with very close intercalation distance between the atomic spacing. After GO:PEDOT:PSS:BSA surface modification, the MXene flakes exhibited low number of stacked layers and higher intercalation distance than pure Mxene. These modified MXene layers are expected to provide more surface area due to binding of GO:PEDOT:PSS:BSA within the MXene interlayers. Figure4b shows that the modified MXene thin film was successfully covered with Cpy particles after testing with the Cpy concentrations of 1 µM in water. AFM analysis was done to compare the surface topology of the thin films, before and after deposition of the Cpy. The EDX mapping analysis suggests that the sulphur element of Cpy was detected, as shown in Fig.4d after Cpy adsorption.

FESEM ofapure Ti2CTxMXene,bTi2CTxMXene:GO:PEDOT:PSS:BSA,cTi2CTxMXene:GO:PEDOT:PSS:BSA after Cpy adsorption;dEDX analysis of (c)

As shown in Fig.5, the surface topology of the thin film showed changing mean surface roughness from 6.2 to 20 nm due to the Cpy adsorption on the MXene surface. A previous study showed a significantly higher conformational change of BSA interaction with the Cpy [68]. The adsorption of Cpy, that alters the surface morphology, is inferred to increase the thin film sheet resistance. From surface profiler analysis, the average thickness of the MXene:GO:PEDOT:PSS:BSA thin film prepared was found to be 0.6 µm.

Surface topology of AFM analysis for MXene:BSA:PEDOT:PSS:GO thin filmabefore testing andbafter testing

Mxene suffers from water oxidation problem. Thus, the desired thin film needs slow rate of water adsorption, in order to prolong MXene thin film stability before CPY sensing. The chosen volume of the sample test in solution for Cpy detection was estimated using volume rate, calculated form the plot of volume in function of time. Figure6a shows the analysis of contact angle for pure BSA, GO:PEDOT:PSS:BSA and MXene:GO:PEDOT:PSS:BSA thin films in a time series. Pure BSA thin film showed an initial contact angle of 120°, as expected since BSA is hydrophobic. The initial contact angle of PEDOT:PSS:GO:BSA and MXene:PEDOT:PSS:GO:BSA thin films were lower than the contact angle of BSA thin films, with values of 91° and 92°, respectively. However, the changes in the contact angle of modified MXene:PEDOT:PSS:GO:BSA in the function of time showed slow water absorption rate, compared to the of BSA and PEDOT:PSS:GO:BSA. This was inferred due to higher BSA content at BSA protection layer on the MXene surface than the thin film without MXene. From the gradient calculation obtained from the plot of volume versus time (Fig.6b), the selection of 0.1 ml of Cpy solution sample (in water) was selected for testing, since it was estimated that this volume was able to maintain its contact angle for more than 30 min, which is compatible for the proposed device testing.

aWater contact anglebwater adsorption analysis of MAXphase, MXene, BSA, BSA:PEDOT:PSS:GO and MXene:GO:PEDOT:PSS:BSA thin films

Raman spectroscopy analysis for MAX phase, MXene, BSA, GO:PEDOT:PSS:BSA and Mxene:GO:PEDOT:PSS:BSA were as shown in Fig.7. For MXene:PEDOT:PSS:GO:BSA thin film, the Raman spectrum exhibited peaks at 160 cm−1and 630 cm−1, which correspond to high A1gvibration mode of Ti and C atoms, Eggroup vibrations of in-plane modes of Ti and C, surface functional groups, respectively. These vibration modes were expected for the delaminated MXene, which have good interactions with the GO, PEDOT:PSS and BSA. The GO G-band of the MXene composite was found to be 1584 cm−1, and, when compared to the literature (1600 cm−1), it can be confirmed that this shift indicates the formation of Ti–O–C bonding between MXene and GO nanosheets [59,72]. The ratio of D band intensity (ID) to G band intensity (IG) of GO interaction in MXene:GO:PEDOT:PSS:BSA thin film showed an increase in intensity from that of 0.95 to 1.007, indicating the presence of neat GO flakes on MXene surface, which means that the GO has been functionalised of MXene. The GO D-band of MXene:GO:PEDOT:PSS:BSA thin film experienced a slightly positive Raman shift of 2 cm−1, compared to the GO:PEDOT:PSS:BSA thin film. This is expected since GO has good interactions with MXene, PEDOT:PSS and BSA due to high content of BSA layer, which correlates to the increase of BSA Raman peak intensity observed at 70–80 cm−1. The increase of band intensity at 1416 cm−1corresponds to PEDOT Cα= Cβasymmetric stretching. The overlapping of these PEDOT absorption bands with GO D-band absorption bands at the shoulder for MXene:GO:PEDOT:PSS:BSA was higher and narrower than those of GO:PEDOT:PSS:BSA thin film, indicating that the PEDOT chain for MXene:GO:PEDOT:PSS:BSA had a higher proportion of quinoid structures, compared to the GO:PEDOT:PSS:BSA thin film. The quinoid structures of PEDOT polymer are expected to enhance the reaction mechanism by promoting the electron transfer process from MXene to Cpy through PEDOT:PSS network [73].

Raman analysis of MAXphase, MXene, BSA, BSA:PEDOT:PSS:GO and MXene:GO:PEDOT:PSS:BSA thin films

Impedance spectroscopy analysis (Fig.8a) was done to study the Mxene composite thin film sheet resistance stability at ambient. Au patterned electrodes, with spacing of 1 mm, were used to deposit the thin film. Figure7(b) shows the prepared thin film that was observed by optical microscopy. From the Nyquist plot as shown in Fig.8a, the semicircle was fitted with the equivalent circuit using Gamry electrochemical analysis software to obtain the thin film sheet resistance. Impedance spectroscopy was recorded for 35 h and the sheet resistance stability was plotted as shown in Fig.8c. The MXene:GO:PEDOT:PSS:BSA thin film showed good thin film resistance stability for long period around 80–100 kohm, thus proving that BSA can protect MXene oxidation problem at ambient.

aExample of impedance analysis of MXene:BSA:GO:PEDOT:PSS thin film prepared onbAu electrode with 1 mm separation,cthin film resistance stability and IDSversus VGateat different VDSfordBSA:GO:PEDOT:PSS andeMXene:BSA:GO:PEDOT:PSS using water empty sample

The first step to operate the ISFET was the choice of the working potential applied for VDS, which correspond to the minimum leakage current at zero VGatebias. The leakage current of the prepared ISFET for MXene:BSA:GO:PEDOT:PSS thin film was compared with the thin film without MXene to select the optimum VDScondition. Distilled water as empty sample was first tested for determining the ISFET operating mode. Figure8d, e shows that the leakage current at 0 VGatebias for BSA:GO:PEDOT:PSS thin film (6 × 10–8−1 × 10–7A) was greater than the leakage current produce by MXene:BSA:GO:PEDOT:PSS thin film (2 × 10–11−4 × 10–10A). The very low leakage current for the MXene composite thin film was due to high BSA binding that protects the thin film from oxidation reaction. At 0 VDS, the threshold voltage for MXene:BSA:GO:PEDOT:PSS thin film was around −0.5 V, whilst, the threshold voltage for BSA:GO:PEDOT:PSS thin film was much higher (−1.5 V). When analysing the effect of increasing the VDSto the trend of IDS, −0.25 V of VDSwas selected for the operating VDSvalue due to the minimum IDSand leakage current generation for both thin film, respectively. In addition, the threshold voltage drift of the MXene:BSA:GO:PEDOT:PSS thin film when increasing the VDSwas very stable and towards to the low potential compared to BSA:GO:PEDOT:PSS thin film, where the drift of the threshold voltage was towards to high potential with the increase of VDS. These data show the high potential of MXene:BSA:GO:PEDOT:PSS thin film presented in this study and applied for sensors due to high BSA content compared to sample without MXene.

The IDS−IRefwas monitored to test the Cpy detection, (as shown in Fig.9a, b) in water. From Fig.9c, when the negative potential was applied to the gate, the current generation was reduced after placing the Cpy solution on the gate, due to the progression adsorption of Cpy to the MXene surface. The reduction of the current that was detected around the time between 10 and 200 s was in agreement with the trend of resistance observed from impedance analysis. The Cpy adsorption process will lead to enhance the resistance of the thin film. This is due to changes in the surface roughness morphology found by AFM analysis, and also additional resistance from Cpy particles on the MXene surface. After the minimum current drop around 200 s, the current increases in the transient state, due to the proposed reduction of Cpy that start produces free ions (H+) from electroreduction of –C = N of the Cpy pyridine ring, thus increasing the sample solution conductivity and current detection. The generation of saturation current generation was found at a threshold voltage of −0.1 V, which was much lower than the reduction potential required by TiO2based material to reduce Cpy and obtained by the amperometry method. This is in agreement with the lower bandgap of Ti2CTXMXene (0.7–0.33 eV) reported theoretically [74], which reducing the reduction potential needed for Cpy reduction. Compared to the TiO2study, this bandgap was much higher than Ti2CTXMXene with a bandgap value of 3.0–3.4 eV [75]. The electroreduction method was more preferable for Ti2CTxMXene based material in detecting Cpy. Hence, this paper provides a new study on Cpy detection based on extracted current rate at transient state (in which the electroreduction process happens as a function of molarity). During sensitivity analysis, the timescale of detection for all measurements was found to be between 200 and 435 s, directly after depositing the sample on the gate. Due to the dissolution of the BSA and the changes in surface morphology of the thin film prepared after testing, the thin film ISFET gate was replaced by new thin films for every measurement. The blank reference used for the sensitivity analysis was distilled water, and the reference calibration point was measured for each five ISFET devices measured.

Example 2 µM Cpy sample IDS-IRefat constant VDS= 0.25 V with VGate(0–0.5 V) foraBSA:PEDOT:PSS:GO,bMxene:BSA:PEDOT:PSS:GO;cIDS−Irefversus time;dsensitivity analysis; (i) is adsorption, (ii) is reduction and (iii) is steady state

Figure9d shows the sensitivity analysis of the ISFET comparison between GO:PEDOT:PSS:BSA and MXene:GO:PEDOT:PSS:BSA thin films. From five tested ISFET devices with different molarity of Cpy, the best linearity of sensitivity, with regression linearity of 0.99, was found at a molarity range of 1–4 µM. The relative standard deviation (RSD) of ISFET response to 1–4 µM Cpy was in range of 5–11% for five successive measurements. The standard deviation of every point of detection might due to non-homogeneity of the numbers of Mxene flake and size that distributed on the thin films surface. The LOD values calculated using the standard deviation of the intercept and slope of the calibration curve were 0.841 µM and 0.95 µM for GO:PEDOT:PSS:BSA and MXene:GO:PEDOT:PSS:BSA, respectively. This study found that the linearity, RSD and response of detection decreased dramatically when Cpy concentrations were higher than 7 µM for both GO:PEDOT:PSS:BSA and MXene:GO:PEDOT:PSS:BSA thin films. This was due to an increase in surface roughness with higher concentration of Cpy adsorption on the MXene surface. This will lead to high contact loss of the thin film contact network, and increase in activation energy for Cpy reduction since excessive Cpy particles on the MXene surface will induce extremely high resistance. The molarity Cpy of 7 µM was selected as the limit of quantitation (LOQ) value. Moreover, the ISFET response also did not show any significant change upon the addition of Cpy at lower concentrations (< 0.1 µM), this due to the low mobility of reaction product, thus resulting in low adsorption of Cpy on MXene surface. The LOD found in this study was lower than TiO2based material [63], which was done by using cyclic voltammetry and amperometry sensing method. Based on overall analyses, the improvement in Cpy detection was due to the high surface area of MXene from the surface modification of the MXene layers with GO, PEDOT:PSS and BSA. The compatibility of binding the BSA protein with Ti2CTXMXene using PEDOT:PSS as surfactant, to create stable colloidal solution and prevent restacking of MXene, was proven to maintain MXene functionality for Cpy detection. As mentioned previously, there were not many studies reported on using Ti2CTXMXene based material for polymer composite applied for electrochemical biosensing [59]. The advantages of low bandgap, high conductivity [58], high electrocatalytic and large interatomic distance of Ti2CTx were favourable for polymer composite.

In this study, a composite of Ti2CTxMXene structure with PEDOT:PSS, GO and BSA was successfully presented for the Cpy detection at micromolar concentration. The proposed composite thin film applied in an ISFET was found to be able to operate with only a very low leakage current for empty sample and a low threshold voltage (VDS) of −0.25 V. The sensor design proposed in this work reduces the ISFET fabrication process patterning complexity. The gate can easily be renewed by drop-casting fresh Ti2CTxMXene colloidal solution. The proposed sensing mechanism provides insight to the analyte adsorption process based on the electrochemical response. The GO and BSA were successfully integrated with Ti2CTXMXene using PEDOT:PSS conductive polymer as a colloidal stabiliser to form a good thin film. The Ti2CTXMXene was found to enhance the active surface area of PEDOT:PSS thin film resulting in a higher sensitivity for Cpy detection than PEDOT:PSS thin film without MXene. The threshold voltage used for electroreduction of the Cpy in the sensing process was found to be much lower compared to the reduction potential required when using TiO2based materials. The prepared MXene based thin film was able to maintain its sheet resistance for at least 35 h. These results demonstrate the great potential of Ti2CTxMXene based materials as promising 2D materials for PEDOT:PSS composite material for electrochemical sensors applications.

Seung KH, Kim DH, Kim TW (2021) Organic light-emitting devices based on conducting polymer treated with benzoic acid. Sci Rep 11(1):1–9

Google Scholar

Galliano S, Bella F, Bonomo M, Giordano F, Grätzel M, Viscardi G, Hagfeldt A, Gerbaldi C, Barolo C (2021) Xanthan‐based hydrogel for stable and efficient quasi‐solid truly aqueous dye‐sensitized solar cell with cobalt mediator. Solar Rrl, p 2000823

Galliano S, Bella F, Bonomo M, Viscardi G, Gerbaldi C, Boschloo G, Barolo C (2020) Hydrogel electrolytes based on xanthan gum: green route towards stable dye-sensitized solar cells. Nanomaterials 10(8):1585

ArticleCASGoogle Scholar

Fagiolari L, Varaia E, Mariotti N, Bonomo M, Barolo C, Bella F (2021) Poly (3, 4‐ethylenedioxythiophene) in dye‐sensitized solar cells: toward solid‐state and platinum‐free photovoltaics. Adv Sustain Syst, p 2100025

Amici J, Torchio C, Versaci D, Dessantis D, Marchisio A, Caldera F, Bella F, Francia C, Bodoardo S (2021) Nanosponge-based composite gel polymer electrolyte for safer Li-O2 batteries. Polymers 13(10):1625

Piana G, Ricciardi M, Bella F, Cucciniello R, Proto A, Gerbaldi C (2020) Poly (glycidyl ether) recycling from industrial waste and feasibility study of reuse as electrolytes in sodium-based batteries. Chem Eng J 382:122934

Bella F, Porcarelli L, Mantione D, Gerbaldi C, Barolo C, Grätzel M, Mecerreyes Da (2021) A water-based and metal-free dye solar cell exceeding 7% efficiency using a cationic poly (3, 4-ethylenedioxythiophene) derivative. Chem Sci 11(6):1485–1493

ArticleGoogle Scholar

Xu S, Shi XL, Dargusch M, Di C, Zou J, Chen ZG (2020) Conducting polymer-based flexible thermoelectric materials and devices: from mechanisms to applications. Prog Mater Sci 121:100840

Chen J, Zhu Y, Huang J, Zhang J, Pan D, Zhou J, Guo Z (2021) Advances in responsively conductive polymer composites and sensing applications. Polym Rev 61(1):157–193

Xu S, Shi XL, Dargusch M, Di C, Zou J, Chen ZG (2021) Conducting polymer-based flexible thermoelectric materials and devices: from mechanisms to applications. Prog Mater Sci 121:100840

Cui J, Xing F, Luo H, Qin J, Li Y, Zhong Y, Wei F et al (2021) General synthesis of hollow mesoporous conducting polymers by dual-colloid interface co-assembly for high-energy-density micro-supercapacitors. J Energy Chem 62:145–152

Zheng X, Shen J, Hu Q, Nie W, Wang Z, Zou L, Li C (2021) Vapor phase polymerized conducting polymer/MXene textiles for wearable electronics. Nanoscale 13(3):1832–1841

Luo X, Yang G, Schubert DW (2021) Electrically conductive polymer composite containing hybrid graphene nanoplatelets and carbon nanotubes: synergistic effect and tunable conductivity anisotropy. Adv Comp Hybrid Mater, pp 1–13

Song P, Liu B, Qiu H, Shi X, Cao D, Gu J (2021) MXenes for polymer matrix electromagnetic interference shielding composites: a review. Comp Commun, p 100653

Wang M, Tang XH, Cai JH, Wu H, Shen JB, Guo SY (2021) Construction, mechanism and prospective of conductive polymer composites with multiple interfaces for electromagnetic interference shielding: a review. Carbon

Zhu X, Hu Y, Wu G, Chen W, Bao N (2021) Two-dimensional nanosheets-based soft electro-chemo-mechanical actuators: recent advances in design, construction, and applications. ACS nano

Won P, Jeong S, Majidi C, Ko SH (2021) Recent advances in liquid metal based wearable electronics and materials. iScience, p 102698

Zhao B, Hamidinejad M, Wang S, Bai P, Che R, Zhang R, Park CB (2021) Advances in electromagnetic shielding properties of composite foams. J Mater Chem A 9(14):8896–8949

Qin S, Usman KAS, Hegh D, Seyedin S, Gogotsi Y, Zhang J, Razal JM (2021) Development and applications of MXene-based functional fibers. ACS Appl Mater Interfaces 13(31):36655–36669

Usman KAA, Qin S, Henderson LC, Zhang J, Hegh D, Razal JM (2021) Ti3C2Tx MXene: from dispersions to multifunctional architectures for diverse applications. Mater Horizons

Moses OA, Gao L, Zhao H, Wang Z, Adam ML, Sun Z, Yu X (2021) 2D materials inks toward smart flexible electronics. Materi Today

Zhan X, Si C, Zhou J, Sun Z (2020) MXene and MXene-based composites: synthesis, properties and environment-related applications. Nanoscale Horizons 5:235–258

Naguib M, Mochalin VN, Barsoum MW, Gogotsi Y (2014) 25th anniversary article: MXenes: a new family of two-dimensional materials. Adv Mater 26:992–1005

Xie Y, Dall’Agnese Y, Naguib M, Gogotsi Y, Barsoum MW, Zhuang HL, Kent PRC (2014) Prediction and characterization of MXene nanosheet anodes for non-lithium-ion batteries. ACS Nano 8:9606–9615

Xie Y, Naguib M, Mochalin VN, Barsoum MW, Gogotsi Y, Yu X, Nam K-W, Yang X-Q, Kolesnikov AI, Kent PRC (2014) Role of surface structure on Li-ion energy storage capacity of two-dimensional transition-metal carbides. J Am Chem Soc 136:6385–6394

Jastrzębska AM, Karwowska E, Wojciechowski T, Ziemkowska W, Rozmysłowska A, Chlubny L, Olszyna A (2019) The atomic structure of Ti 2 C and Ti 3 C 2 MXenes is responsible for their antibacterial activity toward E. coli bacteria. J Mater Eng Perform 28:1272–1277

Lai S, Jeon J, Jang SK, Xu J, Choi YJ, Park J-H, Hwang E, Lee S (2015) Surface group modification and carrier transport properties of layered transition metal carbides (Ti2CTx, T:–OH,–F and–O). Nanoscale 7:19390–19396

Mohan SV, Sirisha K, Rao NC, Sarma PN, Reddy SJ (2004) Degradation of chlorpyrifos contaminated soil by bioslurry reactor operated in sequencing batch mode: bioprocess monitoring. J Hazard Mater 116:39–48

Gouveia JD, Novell-Leruth G, Reis PMLS, Viñes F, Illas F, Gomes JRB (2020) First-principles calculations on the adsorption behavior of amino acids on a titanium carbide MXene. ACS Appl Bio Mater 3:5913–5921

Prats H, McAloone H, Viñes F, Illas F (2020) Ultra-highly selective biogas upgrading through porous MXenes. J Mater Chem A 8:12296–12300

Zhao S, Kang W, Xue J (2014) Role of strain and concentration on the Li adsorption and diffusion properties on Ti2C layer. J Phys Chem C 118:14983–14990

He Y, Zhou X, Zhou L, Zhang X, Ma L, Jiang Y, Gao J (2020) Self-reduction prussian blue on Ti3C2Tx MXenes nanosheets as dual-functional nanohybrid for hydrogen peroxide and pesticide sensing. Ind Eng Chem Res

Kalambate PK, Gadhari NS, Li X, Rao Z, Navale ST, Shen Y, Patil VR, Huang Y (2019) Recent advances in MXene–based electrochemical sensors and biosensors. TrAC Trends Anal Chem 120:115643

Zhao F, Yao Y, Jiang C, Shao Y, Barceló D, Ying Y, Ping J (2020) Self-reduction bimetallic nanoparticles on ultrathin MXene nanosheets as functional platform for pesticide sensing. J Hazard Mater 384:121358

Gao G, O’Mullane AP, Du A (2017) 2D MXenes: a new family of promising catalysts for the hydrogen evolution reaction. ACS Catal 7:494–500

Solomon KR, Williams WM, Mackay D, Purdy J, Giddings JM, Giesy JP (2014) Properties and uses of chlorpyrifos in the United States. Ecol Risk Assess Chlorpyrifos Terr Aquat Syst 8:13–34

Wang D, Singhasemanon N, Goh KS (2016) A statistical assessment of pesticide pollution in surface waters using environmental monitoring data: Chlorpyrifos in Central Valley, California. Sci Total Environ 571:332–341

Mohan HKSV, Chee WK, Li Y, Nayak S, Poh CL, Thean AVY (2020) A highly sensitive graphene oxide based label-free capacitive aptasensor for vanillin detection. Mater Des 186:108208

Wang L, Song H, Yuan L, Li Z, Zhang Y, Gibson JK, Zheng L, Chai Z, Shi W (2018) Efficient U (VI) reduction and sequestration by Ti2CT x MXene. Environ Sci Technol 52:10748–10756

Kugimiya A, Babe F (2011) Phosphate ion sensing using molecularly imprinted artificial polymer receptor. Polym Bull 67(9):2017–2024

Berchmans S, Balamurugan T (2021) Immobilization of molecular assemblies on 2D nanomaterials for electrochemical biosensing applications. In: Immobilization strategies. Springer, Cham, pp 435–474

Liu F, Nie P, He X, Liu X (2021) Soil information sensing technology. In: Agricultural internet of things. Springer, Cham, pp 99–120

Mohd Razib MS, Latip W, Abdul Rashid JI, Knight VF, Wan Yunus WMZ, Ong KK, Mohd Noor SA (2021) An enzyme-based biosensor for the detection of organophosphate compounds using mutant phosphotriesterase immobilized onto reduced graphene oxide. J Chem

Li Y, Peng Z, Holl NJ, Hassan MR, Pappas JM, Wei C, Wu C (2021) MXene–graphene field-effect transistor sensing of influenza virus and SARS-CoV-2. ACS Omega 6(10):6643–6653

Ranjan P, Thomas V, Kumar P (2021) 2D materials as a diagnostic platform for the detection and sensing of the SARS-CoV-2 virus: a bird’s-eye view. J Mater Chem B 9:4608–4619

Eklund P, Rosen J, Persson POÅ (2017) Layered ternary M n+ 1AX n phases and their 2D derivative MXene: an overview from a thin-film perspective. J Phys D Appl Phys 50:113001

Zhou T, Wu C, Wang Y, Tomsia AP, Li M, Saiz E, Fang S, Baughman RH, Jiang L, Cheng Q (2020) Super-tough MXene-functionalized graphene sheets. Nat Commun 11:1–11

CASGoogle Scholar

Hsieh S-R, Reddy PM, Chang C-J, Kumar A, Wu W-C, Lin H-Y (2016) Exploring the behavior of bovine serum albumin in response to changes in the chemical composition of responsive polymers: Experimental and simulation studies. Polymers (Basel) 8:238

Carter DC, Ho JX (1994) Structure of serum albumin. In: Adv Protein Chem. Elsevier, London, pp 153–203

Hirayama K, Akashi S, Furuya M, Fukuhara K (1990) Rapid confirmation and revision of the primary structure of bovine serum albumin by ESIMS and Frit-FAB LC/MS. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 173:639–646

Kubal G, Sadler PJ, Evans RW (1992) Sequential binding of aluminum (3+) to the C-and N-lobes of human serum transferrin detected by proton NMR spectroscopy. J Am Chem Soc 114:1117–1118

Hampitak P, Melendrez D, Iliut M, Fresquet M, Parsons N, Spencer B, Jowitt T, Vijayaraghavan A (2020) Protein interactions and conformations on graphene-based materials mapped using quartz-crystal microbalance with dissipation monitoring (QCM-D). Carbon NY 165:317–327

Zhang H, Zhu Z, Wang Y, Fei Z, Cao J (2018) Changing the activities and structures of bovine serum albumin bound to graphene oxide. Appl Surf Sci 427:1019–1029

Jachimska B, Tokarczyk K, Łapczyńska M, Puciul-Malinowska A, Zapotoczny S (2016) Structure of bovine serum albumin adsorbed on silica investigated by quartz crystal microbalance. Colloids Surf A Physicochem Eng Asp 489:163–172

Phan HTM, Bartelt-Hunt S, Rodenhausen KB, Schubert M, Bartz JC (2015) Investigation of bovine serum albumin (BSA) attachment onto self-assembled monolayers (SAMs) using combinatorial quartz crystal microbalance with dissipation (QCM-D) and spectroscopic ellipsometry (SE). PLoS ONE 10:e0141282

Kubiak-Ossowska K, Tokarczyk K, Jachimska B, Mulheran PA (2017) Bovine serum albumin adsorption at a silica surface explored by simulation and experiment. J Phys Chem B 121:3975–3986

Bhowal AC, Talukdar H, Kundu S (2019) Preparation, characterization and electrical behaviors of PEDOT: PSS-Au/Ag nanocomposite thin films: an ecofriendly approach. Polym Bull 76(10):5233–5251

Yu T, Breslin CB (2019) Two-dimensional titanium carbide MXenes and their emerging applications as electrochemical sensors. J Electrochem Soc 167:37514

Come J, Naguib M, Rozier P, Barsoum MW, Gogotsi Y, Taberna P-L, Morcrette M, Simon P (2012) A non-aqueous asymmetric cell with a Ti2C-based two-dimensional negative electrode. J Electrochem Soc 159:A1368

Echols IJ, An H, Zhao X, Prehn EM, Tan Z, Radovic M, Green MJ, Lutkenhaus JL (2020) pH-Response of polycation/Ti3C2TxMXene layer-by-layer assemblies for use as resistive sensors. Mol Syst Des Eng 5:366–375

Wang S, Liu Y, Lü Q-F, Zhuang H (2020) Facile preparation of biosurfactant-functionalized Ti2CTX MXene nanosheets with an enhanced adsorption performance for Pb (II) ions. J Mol Liq 297:111810

Han C-G, Qian X, Li Q, Deng B, Zhu Y, Han Z, Zhang W, Wang W, Feng S-P, Chen G (2020) Giant thermopower of ionic gelatin near room temperature. Science 368:1091–1098

Kumaravel A, Chandrasekaran M (2015) Electrochemical determination of chlorpyrifos on a nano-TiO2/cellulose acetate composite modified glassy carbon electrode. J Agric Food Chem 63:6150–6156

Gund GS, Park JH, Harpalsinh R, Kota M, Shin JH, Kim T-I, Gogotsi Y, Park HS (2019) MXene/polymer hybrid materials for flexible AC-filtering electrochemical capacitors. Joule 3:164–176

Chen X, Zhao Y, Li L, Wang Y, Wang J, Xiong J, Yu J (2021) MXene/polymer nanocomposites: preparation, properties, and applications. Polym Rev 61(1):80–115

Aakyiir M, Oh JA, Araby S, Zheng Q, Naeem M, Ma J, Mai YW (2021) Combining hydrophilic MXene nanosheets and hydrophobic carbon nanotubes for mechanically resilient and electrically conductive elastomer nanocomposites. Comp Sci Technol 214:108997

Andrianova MS, Gubanova OV, Komarova NV, Kuznetsov EV, Kuznetsov AE (2016) Development of a biosensor based on phosphotriesterase and n-channel ISFET for detection of pesticides. Electroanalysis 28(6):1311–1321

El-Shahawi MS, Kamal MM (1998) Determination of the pesticide Chlorpyrifos by cathodic adsorptive stripping voltammetry, Fresenius. J Anal Chem 362:344–347

Al-Meqbali ASR, El-Shahawi MS, Kamal MM (1998) Differential pulse polarographic analysis of chlorpyrifos insecticide. Electroanal Int J Devoted Fundam Pract Asp Electroanal 10:784–786

Pelit FO, Ertaş H, Ertaş FN (2011) Development of an adsorptive catalytic stripping voltammetric method for the determination of an endocrine disruptor pesticide chlorpyrifos and its application to the wine samples. J Appl Electrochem 41:1279

Dahiya V, Chaubey B, Dhaharwal AK, Pal S (2017) Solvent-dependent binding interactions of the organophosphate pesticide, chlorpyrifos (CPF), and its metabolite, 3, 5, 6-trichloro-2-pyridinol (TCPy), with Bovine Serum Albumin (BSA): A comparative fluorescence quenching analysis. Pestic Biochem Physiol 139:92–100

Zhou G, Wang D-W, Yin L-C, Li N, Li F, Cheng H-M (2012) Oxygen bridges between NiO nanosheets and graphene for improvement of lithium storage. ACS Nano 6:3214–3223

Ouyang J, Xu Q, Chu C-W, Yang Y, Li G, Shinar J (2004) On the mechanism of conductivity enhancement in poly (3, 4-ethylenedioxythiophene): poly (styrene sulfonate) film through solvent treatment. Polymer (Guildf) 45:8443–8450

Kim H, Alshareef HN (2019) MXetronics: MXene-Enabled Electronic and Photonic Devices. ACS Mater Lett 2:55–70

Zhang J, Zhou P, Liu J, Yu J (2014) New understanding of the difference of photocatalytic activity among anatase, rutile and brookite TiO2. Phys Chem Chem Phys 16:20382–20386

Download references

This work was supported by UTHM-UTM CRG grant K035 and Collaborative Research in Engineering, Science and Technology (CREST), R&D Grant No. A154 & P28C1-17, and Postgraduate Research Grant No GPPS-H002. This project is also funded by Ministry of Education (Malaysia) under Fundamental Research Grant Scheme (FRGS), with a reference number of FRGS/1/2018/STG05/UTHM/02/3 or FRGS Vot No. K106. The authors also acknowledge the support from Faezahana Mohkter and Ahmad Nasrul Mohamed for their technical assistance.

Faculty of Engineering, Universiti Malaysia Sabah, Jalan UMS, 88400, Kota Kinabalu, Sabah, Malaysia

M. M. I. Megat Hasnan

Faculty of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Universiti Tun Hussein Onn Malaysia, 86400, Parit Raja, Batu Pahat, Johor, Malaysia

G. P. Lim & M. K. Ahmad

Microelectronics and Nanotechnology-Shamsuddin Research Center, Institute for Integrated Engineering, Universiti Tun Hussein Onn Malaysia, 86400, Parit Raja, Batu Pahat, Johor, Malaysia

N. Nayan

Biosensor and Bioengineering Lab., Microelectronics and Nanotechnology-Shamsuddin Research Center, Institute for Integrated Engineering, Universiti Tun Hussein Onn Malaysia, 86400, Parit Raja, Batu Pahat, Johor, Malaysia

C. F. Soon

Department of Oral and Craniofacial Sciences, Faculty of Dentistry, Universiti Malaya, 50603, Kuala Lumpur, W. Persekutuan Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia

A. A. Abd Halim

Department of Electrical Engineering, Faculty of Engineering, Universiti Malaya, 50603, Kuala Lumpur, W. Persekutuan Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia

S. M. Said

School of Electrical Engineering, Universiti Teknologi Malaysia, UTM, Johor Baru, 81310, Johor, Malaysia

M. S. Mohamed Ali

Physics Division, Centre of Foundation Studies for Agricultural Science, Universiti Putra Malaysia, UPM, 43400, Serdang, Selangor, Malaysia

I. M. Noor

You can also search for this author inPubMedGoogle Scholar

Correspondence toM. M. I. Megat HasnanorN. Nayan.

The authors declare that there is no known conflict of interest regarding this work.

Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

Reprints and permissions

Hasnan, M.M.I.M., Lim, G.P., Nayan, N.et al.The investigation of chlorpyrifos (Cpy) detection of PEDOT:PSS-MXene(Ti2CTX)-BSA-GO composite using P-ISFET reduction method.Polym. Bull.80, 1243–1264 (2023). https://doi.org/10.1007/s00289-022-04105-5

Download citation

Received:23 February 2021

Revised:27 December 2021

Accepted:14 January 2022

Published:03 February 2022

Issue Date:February 2023

DOI:https://doi.org/10.1007/s00289-022-04105-5

Anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:

Sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article.

Provided by the Springer Nature SharedIt content-sharing initiative

View in articleFull size image

146.137.70.67

Argonne Research Library (8200955775)  - Department of Energy DOE Labs (3000179256)  - Colorado Alliance of Research Libraries (8200982549)

© 2025 Springer Nature

AbstractMXenes are two-dimensional materials that are attractive for applications as sensors because they possess high conductivity, super hydrophilicity and high surface area. There already exist substantial researches on the use of Ti3C2Txbased MXenes as electrochemical biosensors, but in contrast Ti2CTXbased MXenes are rarely discussed due to their inherent resistance instability. However, the use of Ti2CTXbased MXenes is still worth exploring as theoretical studies have shown that Ti2CTXpossesses a significantly lower bandgap compared to many other MXenes structures. Herein, this study examines the use of Ti2CTXMXene structures in a P-channel ion-sensitive field-effect transistor (P-ISFET) for the detection of Chlorpyrifos (Cpy). Compositing the PEDOT:PSS thin film with delaminated Ti2CTXMXenes flakes with graphene oxide (GO) and bovine serum albumin (BSA) allows it to maintain its sheet resistance at around 100 kOhm for 3 days. Interestingly when using the composite thin film, the minimum threshold voltage required to observe Cpy electroreduction is −0.1 V. This is much lower than that when using titanium dioxide (TiO2), which is −1.5 V. Composite thin films containing Ti2CTXMXene are found to detect Cpy with higher sensitivity compared to thin films without MXene. This is because the presence of Mxene in the PEDOT:PSS composite thin films improves the surface area available for Cpy detection. This study highlights the potential of Ti2CTxMXene-BSA composite as a promising 2D material for enzyme-free CPY detection.Similar content being viewed by othersElectroanalytical Study of SSeNPs–CGA–FTO Electrochemical Sensor Towards the Detection of H2O2Article02 August 2023Low dimensional Bi2Se3NPs/reduced graphene oxide nanocomposite for simultaneous detection of L-Dopa and acetaminophen in presence of ascorbic acid in biological samples and pharmaceuticalsArticle20 July 2021Electrochemically reduced graphene oxide/Cu-MOF/Pt nanoparticles composites as a high-performance sensing platform for sensitive detection of tetracyclineArticle26 April 2022Explore related subjectsDiscover the latest articles, news and stories from top researchers in related subjects.PolymersUse our pre-submission checklistAvoid common mistakes on your manuscript.IntroductionConductive polymer (CP) such poly(3,4-ethlenedioxythiophene):poly(styrene sulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS), poly(aniline) (PA) and poly(pyrrole) (PPY) has been applied as electrode for organic transistor[1], dye-sensitized solar cells [2,3,4,5], sensors and energy storage for several decades [6,7,8,9,10,11]. Pristine PEDOT:PSS electrode has a very low conductivity. Based on a recent review, the conductivity of PEDOT:PSS can be enhanced by three orders magnitude by thermal treatments, acid treatments, solvent treatment or by increasing the molecular weight [1,3,4]. Beside, dual-colloid interface co-assembly strategy had been shown to engineer hollow mesoporous CP for high-energy–density solid-state planar microsupercapacitor (MSCs) whilst conductive gel polymer electrolyte (CGPE) had shown high potential for stable and safe lithium or sodium batteries [5,11]. Other review had shown that the photovoltaic (PV) that utilizing PEDOT-based counter electrode had produced better efficiency than those of platinum (Pt)-based counter electrode due to improvement in catalytic and charge transfer, respectively [7,8]. This study focus on increasing PEDOT:PSS surface area, conductivity, sensitivity and stability for bio sensing application through 2D material additive. To date, many researchers have made dramatic breakthroughs in achieving high-conductive polymer composites by the introduction of 2D material in the polymer composite network such as graphene, reduced graphene oxide (RGO), boron nitride and recently using MXenes [10,11,12,13,14,15,16,17,18,19]. Compared to the other 2D materials, Mxenes are very attractive due to more versatility in terms of dispersion capability and stability in various solvents [20,21].MXenes are 2D materials with a general formula Mn+1XnTx, where M is an early transition metal, X is a carbon and/or nitrogen wheren= 1, 2 or 3 and Txis a surface termination functional group (−O, −OH, −F) [22]. MXenes are typically produced from their precursor MAX phases by etching away the A content where A is an element from group 13 or 14. In general, MXenes behaviour is metal-like; they exhibit high electrical conductivity, good hydrophilicity (due to − OH or –F surfaces) and excellent mechanical properties. The structure of MXenes provides a highly negative-charged surface area, depending on the intercalation distance between the layers. Their basic structure consists of a multi-stacked layer after delamination which may limit their electrochemical performance. Thus, surface modification of MXenes is crucial for enhancing the intercalation distance between their layers. Previous experimental and theoretical studies have shown that the lighter structures of M2X compared to the M3X2and M4X3also have the highest gravimetric capacities. Thus, it can be surmised that the high surface area and conductivity of these structures are correlated to the MXenes being lighter or having a lower number of atomic layers [23,24,25]. The distance between Ti−C atomic layers for Ti2CTx was found to be larger than that for Ti3C2Txby 0.53 Å [26]. Besides, Ti2C also has shown high methane adsorptive properties compared to Ti3C2[26]. Lai et al. revealed that Ti2CTxpossesses excellent electronic properties and electrocatalytic activity, which are deemed as promising for electrochemistry applications [27]. Recently, Ti2CTxstructures have also shown high gas adsorption capabilities [28,29,30,31]. Another application of Ti2CTxis uranium removal via a sorption-reduction, which has been demonstrated for over a wide pH range. A lot of Ti3C2Txbased MXene electrochemical sensors and biosensors have been explored. Yet, Ti2CTxbased sensors are still less reported [32,33,34,35].Chlorpyrifos [O,O-diethyl O-(3,5,6-trichloro-2-pyridinyl)-phosphorothioate] (Cpy) is an organophosphate pesticide, which is extensively used in domestic and agricultural industries to control various insects and pests [36]. Cpy is lipophilic and exerts toxicity. It can also bind irreversibly to cells and trigger their death after long-term exposure. Thus, the development of a sensor for Cpy detection is critical in ensuring environmental safety. Many industrial and agricultural areas use Cpy as pest control, and may thus contaminate nearby water resources [37].The ion-selective field-effect transistor (ISFET) is a transducer, which is a combination of solution and transistor [38,39,40]. ISFET has been popular applied for bio sensors and agricultural soil analysis [40,41,42]. This work studies the potential of enzyme-free Ti2CTXMXene composite thin films in ISFET structure for Cpy detection. A proper study investigation on the use of standalone MXene Ti2CTXthin film for environmental detection applications is not present yet due to the poor contact between flakes caused by MXene ink being too dilute, ease of oxidation in the presence of oxygen and water, and inability to be annealed at high temperature as the flakes can easily restack [43]. Besides, most of 2D nanomaterial using ISFET sensor requires enzyme immobilization for electrochemical bio sensing application [40,41,42,43,44,45]. Modification of the MXene surface is a promising strategy to enhance the sensitivity (enhances the surface area), selectivity (using protein binder) and sheet resistance stability (introduces protective capacitive layers). Recently, the Ti2CTx MXene − graphene ISFET sensor had been studied for virus sensing and had shown excellent performance of the developed sensor due to the large number of surface-terminating groups of MXene [43,44,45]. This study investigates the effects of Ti2CTxMXene surface modification, in order to synthesize enzyme-free MXene composite thin film with high surface area and stable conductivity for Cpy detection. The main objective of this study is to modify the surface of MXene to overcome its resistance instability, to enhance the d-spacing, to maintain a high surface area, to enhance MXene flake colloidal stability and to produce good conductivity. The strategy to modify the MXene surface is by intercalating MXene layer with GO flakes. This will be expected to improve conductivity and stability simultaneously between flakes. The GO flakes, bound within the MXene interlayers, are expected to enhance the MXene interlayer distance by electrostatic interactions. In addition, previous studies have shown that hybrid MXene-GO composites have better mechanical strength [47].BSA is widely used as a model binding protein for many bio-related applications. It is known to bind to various substances such as fatty acids, hormones and drugs, and it is cheap and commercially available compared to other types of albumin [48]. BSA consists of 583 amino acid residues in a single polypeptide chain. It is a globular protein, which comprises of three homologous domains, namely domain I, II and III. Each domain is further divided into two sub-domains, A and B [49,50,51]. The protein comprises hydrophilic and hydrophobic residues that are beneficial for adsorption of various scaffold materials, depending on the polarity of the scaffold [52]. The interaction between GO and BSA has been reported to involve various noncovalent forces such as the hydrophobic force, hydrogen bonds, van der Waals and π stacking interactions [53]. At pH 7.0, 30% of the amino acid residues of BSA are charged; negatively charged residues include aspartic acid (Asp) and glutamic acid (Glu), and positively charged residue include lysines (Lys), histidines (His) and arginines (Arg) [54]. The charged surface of the BSA is mainly caused by the Lys and His amino acids [54,55]. Among the three homologous domains of BSA (domains I, II and III), domain III possesses more positively charged residues compared to the other two domains that are mostly negatively charged. Thus, the binding site for GO is preferably at domain III of BSA [53]. The dipole moment of BSA points towards the subdomain IIIB, which is slightly negative and relatively hydrophobic. This helps BSA to sufficiently bind to the negatively charged surface of MXene [54,56]. The involvement of both electrostatic and hydrophobic forces between the domain III BSA and MXene are suggested to be similar to the adsorption of silica oxide (SiO2) on to BSA [49]. Moreover, the Kavalue of Cpy and BSA interaction (0.3307 × 105M−1) indicates a moderate binding affinity, and hence an effective binding. Although domain II is negatively charged overall, the subdomain IIA retains its positive charged. Thus, it is proven that Cpy binds to subdomain IIA of BSA via electrostatic interactions [55]. Hence, it is confirmed that BSA proteins, bound to MXene surface, provide a protective capacitive layer for the MXene flake and enhance the physical adsorption of Cpy to MXene for Cpy detection. GO and MXene flakes are naturally hydrophilic, so they are expected to aggregate in the presence of hydrophobic BSA in water. Poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) polystyrene sulfonate (PEDOT:PSS) can have potential to produce electrostatic shielding for MXenes flakes which favours better charge transfer through PEDOT–MXenes conducting paths [57]. To overcome the aggregation problems, PEDOT:PSS polymer is used as a colloidal stabiliser to form a stable colloidal dispersion of hybrid MXene:GO:PEDOT:PSS with BSA immobilized on the MXene surface. The combination of these 2D materials (Mxene and GO) and conductive polymer (PEDOT:PSS) can preserve the conductivity stability of MXene for a long period.As earlier mentioned, there have been plenty of studies that have been conducted on Ti3C2Txas electrochemical biosensors compared to Ti2CTx[58]. Until recently, the study of Ti2CTxis focused on molecular separation, metal ion adsorption, catalytic electrode for lithium ion batteries and supercapacitors [59,60,61,62]. However, there have been no theoretical or experimental studies of Ti2CTxMXene binding with BSA protein, GO and PEDOT:PSS based material for Cpy sensing application reported to date [63]. This is because Ti2CTxMXene easily oxidises, which leads to loss of material conductivity [40,61]. Previous study had shown that the pore structure of Ti3C2TxMXene and it interaction with PEDOT:PSS as conductive polymer had led to high ion mobility and ensured rapid charge transfer [64,65]. Best of our knowledge, most of presented MXenes as conductive polymer composite is by utilising additive of Ti3C2TxMXene and there is no study on PEDOT:PSS interaction with Ti2CTXMXene [64,65,66,67]. Hence, this paper introduces a pioneering study of PEDOT:PSS and Ti2CTXMXene as a composite thin film with stable resistance for Cpy detection. This MXene thin film is used in a P-channel ISFET system for Cpy detection. The conductivity instability problem of Ti2CTXMXene is overcome through GO-PEDOT:PSS interaction and BSA binding. In addition, a negative bias (P-channel type) at the gate is newly introduced for Cpy detection to prevent the degradation of Ti2CTXMXene by the oxidation.Titanium dioxide (TiO2)-based electrochemical reduction for Cpy detection has shown to have a limit of detection (LOD) value in the range of 4.4–11.8 µM−1[63]. TiO2based material was found to require a reduction potential of −1.5 V for Cpy detection. The bandgap of TiO2based materials was in the range of 3.2 eV for anatase, 3.0 eV for rutile and 3.3 eV for brookite structures. The bandgap of Ti2CTXMXenes was found to be much lower than TiO2with a value range of 0.17–0.92 eV depending on the termination functional group [35,65,66,67,68,69]. Hence, Ti2CTXMXenes are expected to result in a lower LOD and require a lower Cpy reduction potential compared to TiO2. In this study, MXene Ti2CTXcomposite thin films of P-ISFET are investigated to detect Cpy in water (pH 7). The Cpy detection depends on the adsorption mechanism and reduction reaction at the MXene Ti2CTXcomposite thin films as the sensing gate. The P-channel type of ISFET is selected to avoid oxidation of MXene film. This study is expected to give new perspectives on the development of polymer base biosensor using Ti2CTxMXene 2D materials.Material and methodsMAX phase powder of Ti2AlC was commercially purchased from Advanced 2D Materials co. ltd., Beijing, China. 49% hydrofluoric acid (HF) was obtained from Merck, Germany and ethanol (98%) was of analytical grade. Commercial bovine serum albumin (BSA) with 98% purity (nuclease and protease free), graphene oxide (GO) solution dispersed in water with density 4 mg/ml, 1.3 w% of poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) polystyrene sulfonate (PEDOT:PSS) dispersed in water and SU-8 negative photoresist laminated film and resist developer were all obtained from Sigma-Aldrich, USA. Indium doped tin oxide (ITO) transparent conductive glass with sheet resistance of 10 Ohm/square is obtained from Zhuhai Kaivo Optoelectronic Co.Ltd. Chlorpyrifos (Cpy)​ 21.2% solution brand Plasbon 250 was commercially obtained from Shopee.Ti2CTXMXene preparation1 g of Ti2AlC MAX phase powder was dispersed in 20 mL solution of a 49% HF and stirred for 24 h at room temperature, 25 °C. Ti2AlC was etched by HF to form Ti2CTxsediment. The sediment was neutralized using deionized water until pH 6 and centrifuged at 3500 rpm for 5 min. The supernatant or exfoliated Ti2C (ex-Ti2CTx) was dried in an oven, at 80 °C for 12 h.Intercalation or delamination of 0.8 g of ex-Ti2CTxpowder was done in 20 mL of 95% ethanol solution by ultrasonication for 24 h. Then the sample was dried in an oven, at 80 °C for 12 h to obtain nanosheets of delaminated MXene (d-Ti2CTx).Surface modification of Ti2CTXMXene5 mg of d-Ti2CTxnanosheets was dispersed in 5 ml water solution that contains 4 mg/ml GO dispersion. Then the mixed solution was ultrasonicated for 1 h to functionalise the GO with d-Ti2CTXMXene via ultrasonic exfoliation. The GO flakes were expected to bind to MXene surface and within the MXene layers, at atomic interplanar distance. Then, the sonicated MXene:GO solution was ultrasonicated with 5 ml of PEDOT:PSS dispersed in water solution for 1 h to enhance MXene:GO dispersion stability. Finally, 5 ml of BSA with a density of 1 mg/ml were slowly added to the MXene:GO:PEDOT:PSS solution and ultrasonicated for 30 min to form homogenous MXene:GO:PEDOT:PSS:BSA colloidal solutions.MXene:GO:PEDOT:PSS:BSA thin film ISFET preparationFigure1a shows the thin film ISFET preparation process. ITO glass was cleaned using dilute HCl, acetone, ethanol, isopropanol and DI water. Then, the ITO glass was laminated with SU-8 photoresist film on a hot plate, at 60 °C. A patterned shadow mask was placed on the laminated ITO, and then immersed in SU-8 developer solution and DI water for SU-8 pattern development. This patterned SU-8 on ITO glass was further exposed to UV-light to create a cavity along this pattern. 0.1 ml of MXene:BSA:GO:PEDOT:PSS colloidal solution was drop casted on the cavity of the glass, and annealed on a hot plate at 50 °C for 15 min to form MXene:BSA:GO:PEDOT:PSS thin film. After that the annealed film was further dried under high vacuumed, in argon flow, to remove excess solvent. Sputtered Au–Si–Pt electrode was bonded above SU-8 layer in a furnace at 95 °C for 15 min. Contacts for source, drain and reference were made by external Au probing to form Mxene:BSA:GO:PEDOT:PSS thin Film ISFET sensor, using platinum electrodes as external reference. The schematic diagram for the proposed and prepared device is shown in details in Fig.1b.Fig. 1MXene:BSA:GO:PEDOT:PSS thin film ISFETafabrication process;bdevice schematic;cprepared device;ddevice designFull size imageCharacterisationsX-ray diffraction (XRD)The elemental composition of the Ti2AlC and d-Ti2CTxpowders was confirmed using X-ray diffraction (XRD) (PANalytical, Netherlands) with setting Cu κα X-ray source (λ = 1.54 Å) with a step size of 0.03°. Both Ti2AlC and d-Ti2CTxpowders were dispersed in water and drop-casted on silicon dioxide (SiO2) wafer for XRD analysis. The angle monitored 2θ was in the range of 5–80°. The analysis was done using HighScore Plus software and HighScore Database.Field emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM)The surface morphology of the MXene based thin film before and after Cpy adsorption were acquired using JSM-7600F field emission scanning electron microscope (FE-SEM, JOEL, Tokyo, Japan) using an upper secondary electron imaging (SEI) detector. Cpy elements adsorbed on Mxene surface were confirmed using energy dispersive X-ray (EDX) (10 keV) coupled with an EMAX energy spectroscope (HORIBA, Ltd., Kyoto, Japan).Contact angle analysisThe contact angle of the thin film was measured using VCA Optima where the changes of the contact angle of the sample, in the function of time, were recorded with a frame rate of 10 frames per second for 500 s. The objective was to observe the adsorption rate of the modified MXene thin film and thin film without MXene. This will lead to the proper timescale selection and sample volume selection for the device testing.Surface profilerThe average thickness of the thin film prepared was measured using Surface profiler Bruker's Dektak® stylus profiler and analysed using Bruker’s Vision64 software.Non-contact atomic force microscopy analysisFirst, both MAX phase and MXene flakes, drop-casted on SiO2were monitored using Park atomic force microscope to investigate their thickness and sizes. Then, the surface topology of MXene:BSA:GO:PEDOT:PSS thin films prepared was monitored before and after sensing to investigate the Cpy adsorption effect on the thin film surface morphology. The surface roughness analysis obtained was further correlated with the sheet resistance analysis using impedance spectroscopy analysis.Raman spectroscopy analysisRaman spectra of the prepared thin film were obtained using a Raman spectroscope (Horiba Xplora Plus, USA) equipped with a 532 nm laser source, a 50 X magnification microscope objective and an electrically refrigerated charged-coupled device (CCD) camera. The objective was to observe the intensity and Raman shift effect of the interaction of the MXene and BSA content due to the active surface area enhancement.Impedance spectroscopy analysisTen samples of MXene:BSA:GO:PEDOT:PSS thin film on Au patterned electrode, with 1 mm electrode separation and 1 mm × 1 mm active area, were measured to investigate the percentage difference of resistance prepared for all samples using impedance spectroscopy analysis. The impedance analyser used was Solatron 1260, using a frequency range of 15 MHz−0.1 mHz. From the Nyquist plot, the real and imaginary impedance were fitted using an equivalent circuit of contact resistor series with sheet resistor parallel with a constant phase element (CPE). The sheet resistance stability of the thin film prepared was investigated in the function of time at ambient condition. In addition, the prepared samples were also tested for physical adsorption with various molarities of Cpy. The physical adsorptions tests were done by dipping the prepare sample in CPY solution in function of time to investigate the effect of Cpy adsorption on the changes of thin film resistance.Thin film ISFET device sensing testCurrent versus voltage I–V curves (dependence of calibrated drain current, (IDS)—reference current, (IRef) on gate voltage VGate) were recorded using high-end Keysight Agilent B1500A semiconductor device parameter analyser (USA) and Lakeshore Model CPX cryogenic probe station. Mxene:BSA:GO:PEDOT:PSS and BSA:GO:PEDOT:PSS thin films of ISFET device were prepared for Cpy detection test, each concentration of four different thin film samples was tested three times. BSA:GO:PEDOT:PSS thin film was prepared as a control experiment to investigate the significance of MXene surface area compared to the thin film without MXene. The films were stored under vacuum condition before tested to maintain and standardise the sheet resistance stability in the range of 90–100 kohm. Different molarity of Cpy in distilled water were prepared from 0.01–100 µM. The VGatewas swept from 0 to −1.5 V and constant source-drain voltage of 0.25 V (VDS) was applied. IDSwas monitored and corrected based on IReffor 12,000 s. IDSgeneration for the sample without Cpy was measured five times using different samples to set the calibration point. The sensitivity was calculated from the current rate versus molarity. The limit of detection (LOD) was calculated from the calibration graph constructed with concentration of Cpy on thex-axis and current rates on they-axis using the relationships LOD = 3 s/m, where s is the standard deviation of the intercept and m is the slope of the calibration curve.Chlorpyrifos (Cpy) detection mechanismThe electroanalytical technique to detect Cpy was based on Cpy adsorption, Cpy electroreduction and current response [60,64]. The ISFET consists of drain and source contacts that separated with the gate by parallel to the SU-8 patterned cavity that filled with test sample. The ISFET architecture is as shown in Fig.2. The gate functions as a capacitive layer to adsorb the Cpy via the physical adsorption when applied with negative electric potential [63,67]. For drain contact, constant voltage VDSwas applied for detection of current flow from the drain to source. The sensing gate was prepared using a volume control drop cast method of MXene composite colloidal solution on the ITO substrate. The gate can be easily cleaned or replaced whilst the drain, source and reference contacts, using an inert external electrode, were reusable. This study used 5 mm × 5 mm thin film active area for the ISFET gate with channel width and height of 5 mm and 3 µm, respectively. Au probing was used to create drain and source, which is separated from the gate by SU-8 photoresist layer with cavity, platinum electrode was used as a reference electrode. The drain and source separation was 5 mm. Upon placing a controlled volume of sample to the channel on the gate, the drain and source become conductive through the solution sample.Fig. 2Proposed Ti2CTXMXene based thin film ISFET sensing mechanismFull size imageThe sensing mechanism for Cpy sensing (as shown in Fig.2), using FET, was through the detection of changes from drain to source current (IDS) rate at transient state, after Cpy physical adsorption. The approach for Cpy detection is by monitoring the relative temporal change of IDSbased on reaction rate of H+ion at transient state [60]. The reactions, which produced current upon Cpy physical adsorption, were monitored. Once the negative potential is applied to the gate, Cpy reduction was activated. This created a capacitive effect for double layer formation near the gate. When the Cpy was adsorbed to the MXene composite thin film surface, the solution resistance and gate resistance increased, thus decreasing the current flow. Then, due to the negative potential applied to the gate, the reduction of Cpy by MXene composite produced current changes due to the electroreduction of –C = N of the pyridine ring of the Cpy via a 2e−transfer step and production of H+ion, as shown in Fig.2[65,66,67]. The IDSwas monitored as function of time, in order to carefully monitor the adsorption and reduction effect to the current detection timescale. In order to select the right sensing timescale, the contact angle analysis, as function of time, was measured, whilst the impedance method was used to clarify the effect of thin film resistance change after Cpy adsorption. Sensitivity analysis was proposed by taking the rate of current generation after the physical adsorption at a transient time in function of Cpy molarity, (A s−1M−1). The gradient of the current generation was expected to have a linear relation with the molarity of the Cpy in water at transient state before Mxene lost it stability.Results and discussionTi2CTxMXene analysisFigure3a shows XRD analysis comparison between Ti2AlC MAX phase and synthesised d-Ti2CTx. Ti2AlC MAX phase and synthesised d-Ti2CTxXRD peaks showed good agreement with the database reference codes of ICSD 98-018-4886 and ICSD 98-007-7473 for Ti2CTxand Ti2AlC MAX phase, respectively. The delaminated MXene was successfully synthesised when the XRD peaks of dominant Ti2AlC MAX phase peaks disappeared at 41.708° and 12.879°, and appearance of new peak at 5.49° in the d-Ti2CTxXRD spectrum. The calculated d-spacing value for the d-Ti2CTxwas 16.37 Å which much larger than the d-spacing of the Ti2AlC MAX phase with d-spacing value of 6 Å. The MXene 2D state is further confirmed using Raman analysis, as shown in Fig.6. The Mxene Raman peaks at 266.46 cm−1, 423 cm−1, 523 cm−1and 601 cm−1showed successful synthesis of d-Ti2CTxfrom Ti2AlC MAX phase, which has a high intensity Raman shift at 601 cm−1. As shown in the AFM analysis (Fig.3b, c), the MXene flake shows an average maximum thickness of 75 nm, which was lower than the average maximum thickness of Ti2AlC MAX phase of 200 nm.Fig. 3XRD analysis and AFM analysis ofaTi2AlC MAXphase andbTi2CTxMXene flakes on SiO2Full size imageThin film characterisationFigure4shows FESEM analysis of prepared thin film of MXene with surface modification of GO, PEDOT:PSS and BSA. Figure4a shows pure MXene flakes with high stacking, with very close intercalation distance between the atomic spacing. After GO:PEDOT:PSS:BSA surface modification, the MXene flakes exhibited low number of stacked layers and higher intercalation distance than pure Mxene. These modified MXene layers are expected to provide more surface area due to binding of GO:PEDOT:PSS:BSA within the MXene interlayers. Figure4b shows that the modified MXene thin film was successfully covered with Cpy particles after testing with the Cpy concentrations of 1 µM in water. AFM analysis was done to compare the surface topology of the thin films, before and after deposition of the Cpy. The EDX mapping analysis suggests that the sulphur element of Cpy was detected, as shown in Fig.4d after Cpy adsorption.Fig. 4FESEM ofapure Ti2CTxMXene,bTi2CTxMXene:GO:PEDOT:PSS:BSA,cTi2CTxMXene:GO:PEDOT:PSS:BSA after Cpy adsorption;dEDX analysis of (c)Full size imageAs shown in Fig.5, the surface topology of the thin film showed changing mean surface roughness from 6.2 to 20 nm due to the Cpy adsorption on the MXene surface. A previous study showed a significantly higher conformational change of BSA interaction with the Cpy [68]. The adsorption of Cpy, that alters the surface morphology, is inferred to increase the thin film sheet resistance. From surface profiler analysis, the average thickness of the MXene:GO:PEDOT:PSS:BSA thin film prepared was found to be 0.6 µm.Fig. 5Surface topology of AFM analysis for MXene:BSA:PEDOT:PSS:GO thin filmabefore testing andbafter testingFull size imageMxene suffers from water oxidation problem. Thus, the desired thin film needs slow rate of water adsorption, in order to prolong MXene thin film stability before CPY sensing. The chosen volume of the sample test in solution for Cpy detection was estimated using volume rate, calculated form the plot of volume in function of time. Figure6a shows the analysis of contact angle for pure BSA, GO:PEDOT:PSS:BSA and MXene:GO:PEDOT:PSS:BSA thin films in a time series. Pure BSA thin film showed an initial contact angle of 120°, as expected since BSA is hydrophobic. The initial contact angle of PEDOT:PSS:GO:BSA and MXene:PEDOT:PSS:GO:BSA thin films were lower than the contact angle of BSA thin films, with values of 91° and 92°, respectively. However, the changes in the contact angle of modified MXene:PEDOT:PSS:GO:BSA in the function of time showed slow water absorption rate, compared to the of BSA and PEDOT:PSS:GO:BSA. This was inferred due to higher BSA content at BSA protection layer on the MXene surface than the thin film without MXene. From the gradient calculation obtained from the plot of volume versus time (Fig.6b), the selection of 0.1 ml of Cpy solution sample (in water) was selected for testing, since it was estimated that this volume was able to maintain its contact angle for more than 30 min, which is compatible for the proposed device testing.Fig. 6aWater contact anglebwater adsorption analysis of MAXphase, MXene, BSA, BSA:PEDOT:PSS:GO and MXene:GO:PEDOT:PSS:BSA thin filmsFull size imageRaman spectroscopy analysis for MAX phase, MXene, BSA, GO:PEDOT:PSS:BSA and Mxene:GO:PEDOT:PSS:BSA were as shown in Fig.7. For MXene:PEDOT:PSS:GO:BSA thin film, the Raman spectrum exhibited peaks at 160 cm−1and 630 cm−1, which correspond to high A1gvibration mode of Ti and C atoms, Eggroup vibrations of in-plane modes of Ti and C, surface functional groups, respectively. These vibration modes were expected for the delaminated MXene, which have good interactions with the GO, PEDOT:PSS and BSA. The GO G-band of the MXene composite was found to be 1584 cm−1, and, when compared to the literature (1600 cm−1), it can be confirmed that this shift indicates the formation of Ti–O–C bonding between MXene and GO nanosheets [59,72]. The ratio of D band intensity (ID) to G band intensity (IG) of GO interaction in MXene:GO:PEDOT:PSS:BSA thin film showed an increase in intensity from that of 0.95 to 1.007, indicating the presence of neat GO flakes on MXene surface, which means that the GO has been functionalised of MXene. The GO D-band of MXene:GO:PEDOT:PSS:BSA thin film experienced a slightly positive Raman shift of 2 cm−1, compared to the GO:PEDOT:PSS:BSA thin film. This is expected since GO has good interactions with MXene, PEDOT:PSS and BSA due to high content of BSA layer, which correlates to the increase of BSA Raman peak intensity observed at 70–80 cm−1. The increase of band intensity at 1416 cm−1corresponds to PEDOT Cα= Cβasymmetric stretching. The overlapping of these PEDOT absorption bands with GO D-band absorption bands at the shoulder for MXene:GO:PEDOT:PSS:BSA was higher and narrower than those of GO:PEDOT:PSS:BSA thin film, indicating that the PEDOT chain for MXene:GO:PEDOT:PSS:BSA had a higher proportion of quinoid structures, compared to the GO:PEDOT:PSS:BSA thin film. The quinoid structures of PEDOT polymer are expected to enhance the reaction mechanism by promoting the electron transfer process from MXene to Cpy through PEDOT:PSS network [73].Fig. 7Raman analysis of MAXphase, MXene, BSA, BSA:PEDOT:PSS:GO and MXene:GO:PEDOT:PSS:BSA thin filmsFull size imageImpedance spectroscopy analysis (Fig.8a) was done to study the Mxene composite thin film sheet resistance stability at ambient. Au patterned electrodes, with spacing of 1 mm, were used to deposit the thin film. Figure7(b) shows the prepared thin film that was observed by optical microscopy. From the Nyquist plot as shown in Fig.8a, the semicircle was fitted with the equivalent circuit using Gamry electrochemical analysis software to obtain the thin film sheet resistance. Impedance spectroscopy was recorded for 35 h and the sheet resistance stability was plotted as shown in Fig.8c. The MXene:GO:PEDOT:PSS:BSA thin film showed good thin film resistance stability for long period around 80–100 kohm, thus proving that BSA can protect MXene oxidation problem at ambient.Fig. 8aExample of impedance analysis of MXene:BSA:GO:PEDOT:PSS thin film prepared onbAu electrode with 1 mm separation,cthin film resistance stability and IDSversus VGateat different VDSfordBSA:GO:PEDOT:PSS andeMXene:BSA:GO:PEDOT:PSS using water empty sampleFull size imageISFET Cpy detectionThe first step to operate the ISFET was the choice of the working potential applied for VDS, which correspond to the minimum leakage current at zero VGatebias. The leakage current of the prepared ISFET for MXene:BSA:GO:PEDOT:PSS thin film was compared with the thin film without MXene to select the optimum VDScondition. Distilled water as empty sample was first tested for determining the ISFET operating mode. Figure8d, e shows that the leakage current at 0 VGatebias for BSA:GO:PEDOT:PSS thin film (6 × 10–8−1 × 10–7A) was greater than the leakage current produce by MXene:BSA:GO:PEDOT:PSS thin film (2 × 10–11−4 × 10–10A). The very low leakage current for the MXene composite thin film was due to high BSA binding that protects the thin film from oxidation reaction. At 0 VDS, the threshold voltage for MXene:BSA:GO:PEDOT:PSS thin film was around −0.5 V, whilst, the threshold voltage for BSA:GO:PEDOT:PSS thin film was much higher (−1.5 V). When analysing the effect of increasing the VDSto the trend of IDS, −0.25 V of VDSwas selected for the operating VDSvalue due to the minimum IDSand leakage current generation for both thin film, respectively. In addition, the threshold voltage drift of the MXene:BSA:GO:PEDOT:PSS thin film when increasing the VDSwas very stable and towards to the low potential compared to BSA:GO:PEDOT:PSS thin film, where the drift of the threshold voltage was towards to high potential with the increase of VDS. These data show the high potential of MXene:BSA:GO:PEDOT:PSS thin film presented in this study and applied for sensors due to high BSA content compared to sample without MXene.The IDS−IRefwas monitored to test the Cpy detection, (as shown in Fig.9a, b) in water. From Fig.9c, when the negative potential was applied to the gate, the current generation was reduced after placing the Cpy solution on the gate, due to the progression adsorption of Cpy to the MXene surface. The reduction of the current that was detected around the time between 10 and 200 s was in agreement with the trend of resistance observed from impedance analysis. The Cpy adsorption process will lead to enhance the resistance of the thin film. This is due to changes in the surface roughness morphology found by AFM analysis, and also additional resistance from Cpy particles on the MXene surface. After the minimum current drop around 200 s, the current increases in the transient state, due to the proposed reduction of Cpy that start produces free ions (H+) from electroreduction of –C = N of the Cpy pyridine ring, thus increasing the sample solution conductivity and current detection. The generation of saturation current generation was found at a threshold voltage of −0.1 V, which was much lower than the reduction potential required by TiO2based material to reduce Cpy and obtained by the amperometry method. This is in agreement with the lower bandgap of Ti2CTXMXene (0.7–0.33 eV) reported theoretically [74], which reducing the reduction potential needed for Cpy reduction. Compared to the TiO2study, this bandgap was much higher than Ti2CTXMXene with a bandgap value of 3.0–3.4 eV [75]. The electroreduction method was more preferable for Ti2CTxMXene based material in detecting Cpy. Hence, this paper provides a new study on Cpy detection based on extracted current rate at transient state (in which the electroreduction process happens as a function of molarity). During sensitivity analysis, the timescale of detection for all measurements was found to be between 200 and 435 s, directly after depositing the sample on the gate. Due to the dissolution of the BSA and the changes in surface morphology of the thin film prepared after testing, the thin film ISFET gate was replaced by new thin films for every measurement. The blank reference used for the sensitivity analysis was distilled water, and the reference calibration point was measured for each five ISFET devices measured.Fig. 9Example 2 µM Cpy sample IDS-IRefat constant VDS= 0.25 V with VGate(0–0.5 V) foraBSA:PEDOT:PSS:GO,bMxene:BSA:PEDOT:PSS:GO;cIDS−Irefversus time;dsensitivity analysis; (i) is adsorption, (ii) is reduction and (iii) is steady stateFull size imageFigure9d shows the sensitivity analysis of the ISFET comparison between GO:PEDOT:PSS:BSA and MXene:GO:PEDOT:PSS:BSA thin films. From five tested ISFET devices with different molarity of Cpy, the best linearity of sensitivity, with regression linearity of 0.99, was found at a molarity range of 1–4 µM. The relative standard deviation (RSD) of ISFET response to 1–4 µM Cpy was in range of 5–11% for five successive measurements. The standard deviation of every point of detection might due to non-homogeneity of the numbers of Mxene flake and size that distributed on the thin films surface. The LOD values calculated using the standard deviation of the intercept and slope of the calibration curve were 0.841 µM and 0.95 µM for GO:PEDOT:PSS:BSA and MXene:GO:PEDOT:PSS:BSA, respectively. This study found that the linearity, RSD and response of detection decreased dramatically when Cpy concentrations were higher than 7 µM for both GO:PEDOT:PSS:BSA and MXene:GO:PEDOT:PSS:BSA thin films. This was due to an increase in surface roughness with higher concentration of Cpy adsorption on the MXene surface. This will lead to high contact loss of the thin film contact network, and increase in activation energy for Cpy reduction since excessive Cpy particles on the MXene surface will induce extremely high resistance. The molarity Cpy of 7 µM was selected as the limit of quantitation (LOQ) value. Moreover, the ISFET response also did not show any significant change upon the addition of Cpy at lower concentrations (< 0.1 µM), this due to the low mobility of reaction product, thus resulting in low adsorption of Cpy on MXene surface. The LOD found in this study was lower than TiO2based material [63], which was done by using cyclic voltammetry and amperometry sensing method. Based on overall analyses, the improvement in Cpy detection was due to the high surface area of MXene from the surface modification of the MXene layers with GO, PEDOT:PSS and BSA. The compatibility of binding the BSA protein with Ti2CTXMXene using PEDOT:PSS as surfactant, to create stable colloidal solution and prevent restacking of MXene, was proven to maintain MXene functionality for Cpy detection. As mentioned previously, there were not many studies reported on using Ti2CTXMXene based material for polymer composite applied for electrochemical biosensing [59]. The advantages of low bandgap, high conductivity [58], high electrocatalytic and large interatomic distance of Ti2CTx were favourable for polymer composite.ConclusionIn this study, a composite of Ti2CTxMXene structure with PEDOT:PSS, GO and BSA was successfully presented for the Cpy detection at micromolar concentration. The proposed composite thin film applied in an ISFET was found to be able to operate with only a very low leakage current for empty sample and a low threshold voltage (VDS) of −0.25 V. The sensor design proposed in this work reduces the ISFET fabrication process patterning complexity. The gate can easily be renewed by drop-casting fresh Ti2CTxMXene colloidal solution. The proposed sensing mechanism provides insight to the analyte adsorption process based on the electrochemical response. The GO and BSA were successfully integrated with Ti2CTXMXene using PEDOT:PSS conductive polymer as a colloidal stabiliser to form a good thin film. The Ti2CTXMXene was found to enhance the active surface area of PEDOT:PSS thin film resulting in a higher sensitivity for Cpy detection than PEDOT:PSS thin film without MXene. The threshold voltage used for electroreduction of the Cpy in the sensing process was found to be much lower compared to the reduction potential required when using TiO2based materials. The prepared MXene based thin film was able to maintain its sheet resistance for at least 35 h. These results demonstrate the great potential of Ti2CTxMXene based materials as promising 2D materials for PEDOT:PSS composite material for electrochemical sensors applications.ReferencesSeung KH, Kim DH, Kim TW (2021) Organic light-emitting devices based on conducting polymer treated with benzoic acid. Sci Rep 11(1):1–9Google ScholarGalliano S, Bella F, Bonomo M, Giordano F, Grätzel M, Viscardi G, Hagfeldt A, Gerbaldi C, Barolo C (2021) Xanthan‐based hydrogel for stable and efficient quasi‐solid truly aqueous dye‐sensitized solar cell with cobalt mediator. Solar Rrl, p 2000823Galliano S, Bella F, Bonomo M, Viscardi G, Gerbaldi C, Boschloo G, Barolo C (2020) Hydrogel electrolytes based on xanthan gum: green route towards stable dye-sensitized solar cells. Nanomaterials 10(8):1585ArticleCASGoogle ScholarFagiolari L, Varaia E, Mariotti N, Bonomo M, Barolo C, Bella F (2021) Poly (3, 4‐ethylenedioxythiophene) in dye‐sensitized solar cells: toward solid‐state and platinum‐free photovoltaics. Adv Sustain Syst, p 2100025Amici J, Torchio C, Versaci D, Dessantis D, Marchisio A, Caldera F, Bella F, Francia C, Bodoardo S (2021) Nanosponge-based composite gel polymer electrolyte for safer Li-O2 batteries. Polymers 13(10):1625ArticleCASGoogle ScholarPiana G, Ricciardi M, Bella F, Cucciniello R, Proto A, Gerbaldi C (2020) Poly (glycidyl ether) recycling from industrial waste and feasibility study of reuse as electrolytes in sodium-based batteries. Chem Eng J 382:122934ArticleCASGoogle ScholarBella F, Porcarelli L, Mantione D, Gerbaldi C, Barolo C, Grätzel M, Mecerreyes Da (2021) A water-based and metal-free dye solar cell exceeding 7% efficiency using a cationic poly (3, 4-ethylenedioxythiophene) derivative. Chem Sci 11(6):1485–1493ArticleGoogle ScholarXu S, Shi XL, Dargusch M, Di C, Zou J, Chen ZG (2020) Conducting polymer-based flexible thermoelectric materials and devices: from mechanisms to applications. Prog Mater Sci 121:100840ArticleGoogle ScholarChen J, Zhu Y, Huang J, Zhang J, Pan D, Zhou J, Guo Z (2021) Advances in responsively conductive polymer composites and sensing applications. Polym Rev 61(1):157–193ArticleCASGoogle ScholarXu S, Shi XL, Dargusch M, Di C, Zou J, Chen ZG (2021) Conducting polymer-based flexible thermoelectric materials and devices: from mechanisms to applications. Prog Mater Sci 121:100840ArticleCASGoogle ScholarCui J, Xing F, Luo H, Qin J, Li Y, Zhong Y, Wei F et al (2021) General synthesis of hollow mesoporous conducting polymers by dual-colloid interface co-assembly for high-energy-density micro-supercapacitors. J Energy Chem 62:145–152ArticleCASGoogle ScholarZheng X, Shen J, Hu Q, Nie W, Wang Z, Zou L, Li C (2021) Vapor phase polymerized conducting polymer/MXene textiles for wearable electronics. Nanoscale 13(3):1832–1841ArticleCASGoogle ScholarLuo X, Yang G, Schubert DW (2021) Electrically conductive polymer composite containing hybrid graphene nanoplatelets and carbon nanotubes: synergistic effect and tunable conductivity anisotropy. Adv Comp Hybrid Mater, pp 1–13Song P, Liu B, Qiu H, Shi X, Cao D, Gu J (2021) MXenes for polymer matrix electromagnetic interference shielding composites: a review. Comp Commun, p 100653Wang M, Tang XH, Cai JH, Wu H, Shen JB, Guo SY (2021) Construction, mechanism and prospective of conductive polymer composites with multiple interfaces for electromagnetic interference shielding: a review. CarbonZhu X, Hu Y, Wu G, Chen W, Bao N (2021) Two-dimensional nanosheets-based soft electro-chemo-mechanical actuators: recent advances in design, construction, and applications. ACS nanoWon P, Jeong S, Majidi C, Ko SH (2021) Recent advances in liquid metal based wearable electronics and materials. iScience, p 102698Zhao B, Hamidinejad M, Wang S, Bai P, Che R, Zhang R, Park CB (2021) Advances in electromagnetic shielding properties of composite foams. J Mater Chem A 9(14):8896–8949ArticleCASGoogle ScholarQin S, Usman KAS, Hegh D, Seyedin S, Gogotsi Y, Zhang J, Razal JM (2021) Development and applications of MXene-based functional fibers. ACS Appl Mater Interfaces 13(31):36655–36669ArticleCASGoogle ScholarUsman KAA, Qin S, Henderson LC, Zhang J, Hegh D, Razal JM (2021) Ti3C2Tx MXene: from dispersions to multifunctional architectures for diverse applications. Mater HorizonsMoses OA, Gao L, Zhao H, Wang Z, Adam ML, Sun Z, Yu X (2021) 2D materials inks toward smart flexible electronics. Materi TodayZhan X, Si C, Zhou J, Sun Z (2020) MXene and MXene-based composites: synthesis, properties and environment-related applications. Nanoscale Horizons 5:235–258ArticleCASGoogle ScholarNaguib M, Mochalin VN, Barsoum MW, Gogotsi Y (2014) 25th anniversary article: MXenes: a new family of two-dimensional materials. Adv Mater 26:992–1005ArticleCASGoogle ScholarXie Y, Dall’Agnese Y, Naguib M, Gogotsi Y, Barsoum MW, Zhuang HL, Kent PRC (2014) Prediction and characterization of MXene nanosheet anodes for non-lithium-ion batteries. ACS Nano 8:9606–9615ArticleCASGoogle ScholarXie Y, Naguib M, Mochalin VN, Barsoum MW, Gogotsi Y, Yu X, Nam K-W, Yang X-Q, Kolesnikov AI, Kent PRC (2014) Role of surface structure on Li-ion energy storage capacity of two-dimensional transition-metal carbides. J Am Chem Soc 136:6385–6394ArticleCASGoogle ScholarJastrzębska AM, Karwowska E, Wojciechowski T, Ziemkowska W, Rozmysłowska A, Chlubny L, Olszyna A (2019) The atomic structure of Ti 2 C and Ti 3 C 2 MXenes is responsible for their antibacterial activity toward E. coli bacteria. J Mater Eng Perform 28:1272–1277ArticleGoogle ScholarLai S, Jeon J, Jang SK, Xu J, Choi YJ, Park J-H, Hwang E, Lee S (2015) Surface group modification and carrier transport properties of layered transition metal carbides (Ti2CTx, T:–OH,–F and–O). Nanoscale 7:19390–19396ArticleCASGoogle ScholarMohan SV, Sirisha K, Rao NC, Sarma PN, Reddy SJ (2004) Degradation of chlorpyrifos contaminated soil by bioslurry reactor operated in sequencing batch mode: bioprocess monitoring. J Hazard Mater 116:39–48ArticleCASGoogle ScholarGouveia JD, Novell-Leruth G, Reis PMLS, Viñes F, Illas F, Gomes JRB (2020) First-principles calculations on the adsorption behavior of amino acids on a titanium carbide MXene. ACS Appl Bio Mater 3:5913–5921ArticleCASGoogle ScholarPrats H, McAloone H, Viñes F, Illas F (2020) Ultra-highly selective biogas upgrading through porous MXenes. J Mater Chem A 8:12296–12300ArticleCASGoogle ScholarZhao S, Kang W, Xue J (2014) Role of strain and concentration on the Li adsorption and diffusion properties on Ti2C layer. J Phys Chem C 118:14983–14990ArticleCASGoogle ScholarHe Y, Zhou X, Zhou L, Zhang X, Ma L, Jiang Y, Gao J (2020) Self-reduction prussian blue on Ti3C2Tx MXenes nanosheets as dual-functional nanohybrid for hydrogen peroxide and pesticide sensing. Ind Eng Chem ResKalambate PK, Gadhari NS, Li X, Rao Z, Navale ST, Shen Y, Patil VR, Huang Y (2019) Recent advances in MXene–based electrochemical sensors and biosensors. TrAC Trends Anal Chem 120:115643ArticleCASGoogle ScholarZhao F, Yao Y, Jiang C, Shao Y, Barceló D, Ying Y, Ping J (2020) Self-reduction bimetallic nanoparticles on ultrathin MXene nanosheets as functional platform for pesticide sensing. J Hazard Mater 384:121358ArticleCASGoogle ScholarGao G, O’Mullane AP, Du A (2017) 2D MXenes: a new family of promising catalysts for the hydrogen evolution reaction. ACS Catal 7:494–500ArticleCASGoogle ScholarSolomon KR, Williams WM, Mackay D, Purdy J, Giddings JM, Giesy JP (2014) Properties and uses of chlorpyrifos in the United States. Ecol Risk Assess Chlorpyrifos Terr Aquat Syst 8:13–34Google ScholarWang D, Singhasemanon N, Goh KS (2016) A statistical assessment of pesticide pollution in surface waters using environmental monitoring data: Chlorpyrifos in Central Valley, California. Sci Total Environ 571:332–341ArticleCASGoogle ScholarMohan HKSV, Chee WK, Li Y, Nayak S, Poh CL, Thean AVY (2020) A highly sensitive graphene oxide based label-free capacitive aptasensor for vanillin detection. Mater Des 186:108208ArticleGoogle ScholarWang L, Song H, Yuan L, Li Z, Zhang Y, Gibson JK, Zheng L, Chai Z, Shi W (2018) Efficient U (VI) reduction and sequestration by Ti2CT x MXene. Environ Sci Technol 52:10748–10756ArticleCASGoogle ScholarKugimiya A, Babe F (2011) Phosphate ion sensing using molecularly imprinted artificial polymer receptor. Polym Bull 67(9):2017–2024ArticleCASGoogle ScholarBerchmans S, Balamurugan T (2021) Immobilization of molecular assemblies on 2D nanomaterials for electrochemical biosensing applications. In: Immobilization strategies. Springer, Cham, pp 435–474Liu F, Nie P, He X, Liu X (2021) Soil information sensing technology. In: Agricultural internet of things. Springer, Cham, pp 99–120Mohd Razib MS, Latip W, Abdul Rashid JI, Knight VF, Wan Yunus WMZ, Ong KK, Mohd Noor SA (2021) An enzyme-based biosensor for the detection of organophosphate compounds using mutant phosphotriesterase immobilized onto reduced graphene oxide. J ChemLi Y, Peng Z, Holl NJ, Hassan MR, Pappas JM, Wei C, Wu C (2021) MXene–graphene field-effect transistor sensing of influenza virus and SARS-CoV-2. ACS Omega 6(10):6643–6653ArticleCASGoogle ScholarRanjan P, Thomas V, Kumar P (2021) 2D materials as a diagnostic platform for the detection and sensing of the SARS-CoV-2 virus: a bird’s-eye view. J Mater Chem B 9:4608–4619ArticleCASGoogle ScholarEklund P, Rosen J, Persson POÅ (2017) Layered ternary M n+ 1AX n phases and their 2D derivative MXene: an overview from a thin-film perspective. J Phys D Appl Phys 50:113001ArticleGoogle ScholarZhou T, Wu C, Wang Y, Tomsia AP, Li M, Saiz E, Fang S, Baughman RH, Jiang L, Cheng Q (2020) Super-tough MXene-functionalized graphene sheets. Nat Commun 11:1–11CASGoogle ScholarHsieh S-R, Reddy PM, Chang C-J, Kumar A, Wu W-C, Lin H-Y (2016) Exploring the behavior of bovine serum albumin in response to changes in the chemical composition of responsive polymers: Experimental and simulation studies. Polymers (Basel) 8:238ArticleGoogle ScholarCarter DC, Ho JX (1994) Structure of serum albumin. In: Adv Protein Chem. Elsevier, London, pp 153–203Hirayama K, Akashi S, Furuya M, Fukuhara K (1990) Rapid confirmation and revision of the primary structure of bovine serum albumin by ESIMS and Frit-FAB LC/MS. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 173:639–646ArticleCASGoogle ScholarKubal G, Sadler PJ, Evans RW (1992) Sequential binding of aluminum (3+) to the C-and N-lobes of human serum transferrin detected by proton NMR spectroscopy. J Am Chem Soc 114:1117–1118ArticleCASGoogle ScholarHampitak P, Melendrez D, Iliut M, Fresquet M, Parsons N, Spencer B, Jowitt T, Vijayaraghavan A (2020) Protein interactions and conformations on graphene-based materials mapped using quartz-crystal microbalance with dissipation monitoring (QCM-D). Carbon NY 165:317–327ArticleCASGoogle ScholarZhang H, Zhu Z, Wang Y, Fei Z, Cao J (2018) Changing the activities and structures of bovine serum albumin bound to graphene oxide. Appl Surf Sci 427:1019–1029Google ScholarJachimska B, Tokarczyk K, Łapczyńska M, Puciul-Malinowska A, Zapotoczny S (2016) Structure of bovine serum albumin adsorbed on silica investigated by quartz crystal microbalance. Colloids Surf A Physicochem Eng Asp 489:163–172ArticleCASGoogle ScholarPhan HTM, Bartelt-Hunt S, Rodenhausen KB, Schubert M, Bartz JC (2015) Investigation of bovine serum albumin (BSA) attachment onto self-assembled monolayers (SAMs) using combinatorial quartz crystal microbalance with dissipation (QCM-D) and spectroscopic ellipsometry (SE). PLoS ONE 10:e0141282ArticleGoogle ScholarKubiak-Ossowska K, Tokarczyk K, Jachimska B, Mulheran PA (2017) Bovine serum albumin adsorption at a silica surface explored by simulation and experiment. J Phys Chem B 121:3975–3986ArticleCASGoogle ScholarBhowal AC, Talukdar H, Kundu S (2019) Preparation, characterization and electrical behaviors of PEDOT: PSS-Au/Ag nanocomposite thin films: an ecofriendly approach. Polym Bull 76(10):5233–5251ArticleCASGoogle ScholarYu T, Breslin CB (2019) Two-dimensional titanium carbide MXenes and their emerging applications as electrochemical sensors. J Electrochem Soc 167:37514ArticleGoogle ScholarCome J, Naguib M, Rozier P, Barsoum MW, Gogotsi Y, Taberna P-L, Morcrette M, Simon P (2012) A non-aqueous asymmetric cell with a Ti2C-based two-dimensional negative electrode. J Electrochem Soc 159:A1368ArticleCASGoogle ScholarEchols IJ, An H, Zhao X, Prehn EM, Tan Z, Radovic M, Green MJ, Lutkenhaus JL (2020) pH-Response of polycation/Ti3C2TxMXene layer-by-layer assemblies for use as resistive sensors. Mol Syst Des Eng 5:366–375ArticleCASGoogle ScholarWang S, Liu Y, Lü Q-F, Zhuang H (2020) Facile preparation of biosurfactant-functionalized Ti2CTX MXene nanosheets with an enhanced adsorption performance for Pb (II) ions. J Mol Liq 297:111810ArticleCASGoogle ScholarHan C-G, Qian X, Li Q, Deng B, Zhu Y, Han Z, Zhang W, Wang W, Feng S-P, Chen G (2020) Giant thermopower of ionic gelatin near room temperature. Science 368:1091–1098ArticleCASGoogle ScholarKumaravel A, Chandrasekaran M (2015) Electrochemical determination of chlorpyrifos on a nano-TiO2/cellulose acetate composite modified glassy carbon electrode. J Agric Food Chem 63:6150–6156ArticleCASGoogle ScholarGund GS, Park JH, Harpalsinh R, Kota M, Shin JH, Kim T-I, Gogotsi Y, Park HS (2019) MXene/polymer hybrid materials for flexible AC-filtering electrochemical capacitors. Joule 3:164–176ArticleCASGoogle ScholarChen X, Zhao Y, Li L, Wang Y, Wang J, Xiong J, Yu J (2021) MXene/polymer nanocomposites: preparation, properties, and applications. Polym Rev 61(1):80–115ArticleCASGoogle ScholarAakyiir M, Oh JA, Araby S, Zheng Q, Naeem M, Ma J, Mai YW (2021) Combining hydrophilic MXene nanosheets and hydrophobic carbon nanotubes for mechanically resilient and electrically conductive elastomer nanocomposites. Comp Sci Technol 214:108997ArticleCASGoogle ScholarAndrianova MS, Gubanova OV, Komarova NV, Kuznetsov EV, Kuznetsov AE (2016) Development of a biosensor based on phosphotriesterase and n-channel ISFET for detection of pesticides. Electroanalysis 28(6):1311–1321ArticleCASGoogle ScholarEl-Shahawi MS, Kamal MM (1998) Determination of the pesticide Chlorpyrifos by cathodic adsorptive stripping voltammetry, Fresenius. J Anal Chem 362:344–347CASGoogle ScholarAl-Meqbali ASR, El-Shahawi MS, Kamal MM (1998) Differential pulse polarographic analysis of chlorpyrifos insecticide. Electroanal Int J Devoted Fundam Pract Asp Electroanal 10:784–786CASGoogle ScholarPelit FO, Ertaş H, Ertaş FN (2011) Development of an adsorptive catalytic stripping voltammetric method for the determination of an endocrine disruptor pesticide chlorpyrifos and its application to the wine samples. J Appl Electrochem 41:1279ArticleCASGoogle ScholarDahiya V, Chaubey B, Dhaharwal AK, Pal S (2017) Solvent-dependent binding interactions of the organophosphate pesticide, chlorpyrifos (CPF), and its metabolite, 3, 5, 6-trichloro-2-pyridinol (TCPy), with Bovine Serum Albumin (BSA): A comparative fluorescence quenching analysis. Pestic Biochem Physiol 139:92–100ArticleCASGoogle ScholarZhou G, Wang D-W, Yin L-C, Li N, Li F, Cheng H-M (2012) Oxygen bridges between NiO nanosheets and graphene for improvement of lithium storage. ACS Nano 6:3214–3223ArticleCASGoogle ScholarOuyang J, Xu Q, Chu C-W, Yang Y, Li G, Shinar J (2004) On the mechanism of conductivity enhancement in poly (3, 4-ethylenedioxythiophene): poly (styrene sulfonate) film through solvent treatment. Polymer (Guildf) 45:8443–8450ArticleCASGoogle ScholarKim H, Alshareef HN (2019) MXetronics: MXene-Enabled Electronic and Photonic Devices. ACS Mater Lett 2:55–70ArticleGoogle ScholarZhang J, Zhou P, Liu J, Yu J (2014) New understanding of the difference of photocatalytic activity among anatase, rutile and brookite TiO2. Phys Chem Chem Phys 16:20382–20386ArticleCASGoogle ScholarDownload referencesAcknowledgementsThis work was supported by UTHM-UTM CRG grant K035 and Collaborative Research in Engineering, Science and Technology (CREST), R&D Grant No. A154 & P28C1-17, and Postgraduate Research Grant No GPPS-H002. This project is also funded by Ministry of Education (Malaysia) under Fundamental Research Grant Scheme (FRGS), with a reference number of FRGS/1/2018/STG05/UTHM/02/3 or FRGS Vot No. K106. The authors also acknowledge the support from Faezahana Mohkter and Ahmad Nasrul Mohamed for their technical assistance.Author informationAuthors and AffiliationsFaculty of Engineering, Universiti Malaysia Sabah, Jalan UMS, 88400, Kota Kinabalu, Sabah, MalaysiaM. M. I. Megat HasnanFaculty of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Universiti Tun Hussein Onn Malaysia, 86400, Parit Raja, Batu Pahat, Johor, MalaysiaG. P. Lim & M. K. AhmadMicroelectronics and Nanotechnology-Shamsuddin Research Center, Institute for Integrated Engineering, Universiti Tun Hussein Onn Malaysia, 86400, Parit Raja, Batu Pahat, Johor, MalaysiaN. NayanBiosensor and Bioengineering Lab., Microelectronics and Nanotechnology-Shamsuddin Research Center, Institute for Integrated Engineering, Universiti Tun Hussein Onn Malaysia, 86400, Parit Raja, Batu Pahat, Johor, MalaysiaC. F. SoonDepartment of Oral and Craniofacial Sciences, Faculty of Dentistry, Universiti Malaya, 50603, Kuala Lumpur, W. Persekutuan Kuala Lumpur, MalaysiaA. A. Abd HalimDepartment of Electrical Engineering, Faculty of Engineering, Universiti Malaya, 50603, Kuala Lumpur, W. Persekutuan Kuala Lumpur, MalaysiaS. M. SaidSchool of Electrical Engineering, Universiti Teknologi Malaysia, UTM, Johor Baru, 81310, Johor, MalaysiaM. S. Mohamed AliPhysics Division, Centre of Foundation Studies for Agricultural Science, Universiti Putra Malaysia, UPM, 43400, Serdang, Selangor, MalaysiaI. M. NoorAuthorsM. M. I. Megat HasnanView author publicationsYou can also search for this author inPubMedGoogle ScholarG. P. LimView author publicationsYou can also search for this author inPubMedGoogle ScholarN. NayanView author publicationsYou can also search for this author inPubMedGoogle ScholarC. F. SoonView author publicationsYou can also search for this author inPubMedGoogle ScholarA. A. Abd HalimView author publicationsYou can also search for this author inPubMedGoogle ScholarM. K. AhmadView author publicationsYou can also search for this author inPubMedGoogle ScholarS. M. SaidView author publicationsYou can also search for this author inPubMedGoogle ScholarM. S. Mohamed AliView author publicationsYou can also search for this author inPubMedGoogle ScholarI. M. NoorView author publicationsYou can also search for this author inPubMedGoogle ScholarCorresponding authorsCorrespondence toM. M. I. Megat HasnanorN. Nayan.Ethics declarationsConflict of interestThe authors declare that there is no known conflict of interest regarding this work.Additional informationPublisher's NoteSpringer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.Rights and permissionsReprints and permissionsAbout this articleCite this articleHasnan, M.M.I.M., Lim, G.P., Nayan, N.et al.The investigation of chlorpyrifos (Cpy) detection of PEDOT:PSS-MXene(Ti2CTX)-BSA-GO composite using P-ISFET reduction method.Polym. Bull.80, 1243–1264 (2023). https://doi.org/10.1007/s00289-022-04105-5Download citationReceived:23 February 2021Revised:27 December 2021Accepted:14 January 2022Published:03 February 2022Issue Date:February 2023DOI:https://doi.org/10.1007/s00289-022-04105-5Share this articleAnyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:Get shareable linkSorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article.Copy to clipboardProvided by the Springer Nature SharedIt content-sharing initiativeKeywords2D materialTi2CTXMXeneIon-selective field-effect transistorChlorpyrifosGraphene oxidePEDOT:PSSBovine serum albumin