We use essential cookies to make sure the site can function. We also use optional cookies for advertising, personalisation of content, usage analysis, and social media.

By accepting optional cookies, you consent to the processing of your personal data - including transfers to third parties. Some third parties are outside of the European Economic Area, with varying standards of data protection.

See ourprivacy policyfor more information on the use of your personal data.

Manage preferencesfor further information and to change your choices.

Access provided by Argonne Research Library

917Accesses

18Citations

Explore all metrics

In this research work, non-enzymatic FET sensor using silver nanoparticles (Ag NPs) decorated graphene has been fabricated for the detection of various glucose concentration levels. Graphene was deposited using chemical vapour deposition technique and Ag NPs was decorated on the surface of graphene via sputtering technique. FET glucose sensor was tested under optimal conditions (pH 7.4) in linear range 0.1 µM–0.25 µM of glucose concentration levels. It was observed that, developed FET glucose sensor delivers high sensitivity which was compared with previously reported electrodes. The reproducibility of FET based glucose sensor was tested using different interfering species along with glucose concentrations. On examining the behavioural characteristics of FET sensor towards glucose detection it was found to offer a potential device for further real-time clinical applications.

Avoid common mistakes on your manuscript.

Diabetes mellitus is one of the most incurable disease in worldwide and caused by a lack of insulin hormone secretion in the human body. Improper level of glucose in the blood leads to a number of life-threading conditions resulting lot of risks such as cardiac problems, nervous problems, stroke, etc,. In a recent survey, reports show more than 400 million people are suffered from this disease. Type-1 diabetes (T1D) is a metabolic disease, which was caused by instable secretion of insulin hormone and that can be managed through insulin injection. Also T1D individuals suffer from serious and chronic disorders, such as blindness and tissue damage.Type-2 diabetes (T2D) results with resistance to insulin and relative secretion of immune deficiency. These types of diabetes suffer from major diseases like heart and kidney stone problems. Thus, it is necessary to monitor and measure the blood glucose levels for type 2 based diabetes [1,2].

With the rising demand glucose plays important role in day-to-day human metabolism process. It is very important to develop high-performance glucose sensors carrying high sensitivity, stability and low cost found to exhibit most promising traditional research in medical and healthcare applications [3,4]. Among the glucose monitoring sensors, electrochemical sensor and optical sensors are readily continuing the research area for glucose sensing applications. In general, traditional electrochemical sensor uses three electrodes that involve working electrode, a counter electrode and a reference electrode. For enhancing the practical requirements, the reference electrode of the sensor needs to be miniaturized which unavoidably degrades the sensitivity and stability due to reduction of sensing area [5]. Considering the traditional electrode criterion, in 1970 the concept based on ion selectivity FET (ISFET) was introduced for detecting biomolecules such as penicillin, DNA, proteins, enzymes, and cells [6,7,8]. Interestingly, conventional metal wire electrode is considered as ion-selective electrode (ISE) which was directly coated using ion-selective membrane (ISM) such as nanoparticles, carbon nanotubes (CNT), graphene, nanocomposites and nanostructures resulting with the simpler arrangement, smaller and inexpensive. These FET sensors using nanomaterials are found to have considerable attention because of its potential properties such as miniaturization, parallel sensing, fast response time, high sensitivity and seamless integration with electronic manufacturing processes [9,10,11,12,13,14,15]. However, multilayer coating process using nanomaterials involved with challenging fabrication procedures.

Among these materials, graphene is found to provide excellent membrane activity coated on electrode device (FTO) since their tuneable and unique properties are capable of providing excellent electronic signals for presenting novel functions. In addition, graphene is a two-dimensional hexagonal arrangement of sp2bonded carbon atoms occurring within a carbon material structure. It has an amazing electronic and a mechanical property that provides excellent thermal conductivity, zero band-gap, fastest electron mobility, biocompatible and large surface area so it was used as active material in energy harvesting, biomedical and biosensor applications [11,12,16,17]. Moreover, large surface area and excellent electrical conductivity of graphene allow it to act as “electron wire” between redox centers of analytes and electrode surface. These single layer graphene could provide decreased overlapping band which ultimately has tendency to act as zero-gap semiconductor so graphene may be best possible metal for transistor applications [18,19].

Many nanomaterials have been reported for non-enzymatic electrochemical and FET sensors for glucose sensing applications. Rafiq Ahmad et al. (2017) reported on CuO decorated ZnO nanorods on non-enzymatic electrochemical glucose sensor. The nanostructure CuO-ZnO hybrid exhibited on potential outcomes on sensor sensitivity due to their high surface to volume ratio. The externally modified CuO has capacity to possess excellent electrochemical and catalytic properties which enables the surface oriented electrochemical anodization for glucose detection (glucosegluconolactone) [21]. Jung, Ahmad et al. narrated on non-enzymatic flexible FET glucose sensor which conveyed enhanced sensing behaviour in different linear range of glucose concentrations. They used NiO QDs-ZnO NRs on Polyimide substrate that facilitates Id–Vgresponses for different glucose concentrations at room temperature. At high potential, NiO leads to NiOOH production that assisted in improving the sensor performance [20]. In order to reduce the structural instability of metal oxides during detection processes they are externally coated using metal oxides, polymers or metals. Ensaf et al. described on silver nanoparticle decorated organic functionalized MWCNTs for non-enzymatic electrochemical glucose detection. In this, MWCNTs was functionalized with organic ligands for effective loading of Ag NPs for improved electrochemical performance [22].

It is worth to mention that previous research works brings into the knowledge on nanostructural modification with metal oxides or polymers for operative electrochemical processes that proceeds for glucose and other biomolecules detection [23,24]. These metal oxides or polymeric loading facilitates for effective redox properties for eminent detection. A significant importance has to be brought into consideration for effortless and impressive progress towards the sensor performance for glucose detection. For better execution of FET sensor, Ag NPs decorated graphene was used as glucose sensor which was reported in this research work and believed that generation of oxide layer on the surface of metal NPs has been taken into consideration. This may be due to the accumulation of biomolecules (analytes) on the surface of Ag NPs results rendering to metal oxide layer. The possible generation of metal oxide (AgO) on the graphene network during the sensing aids in superior performance and this phenomenon has not reported previously.

To evaluate our research view, silver nanoparticles (Ag NPs) was employed to provide good conductivity and high performance for detecting the analytes. In addition, graphene deposition was carried out on FTO using CVD process and silver NPs was loaded on graphene using sputtering process and enabled as glucose monitoring FET sensor. For electronic FET sensors, silver nanoparticles helps to improve the surface area in sensitive signal transduction during sensing process which further helps in evaluating sensing and stability behaviours.

Graphene was grown on Cu foil by using CVD method and transferred/deposited onto the targeted substrate and the similar procedure was adopted from reported articles [25].Aluminium sheet was purchased from Sigma Aldrich with diameter 3.0 inch*0.125 inches for creating the contacts on the substrate through thermal evaporation technique. The structural and morphological analysis of graphene and silver Nanoparticles deposition was tested using X-ray diffraction (RigakuMiniflux), Japan and Field emission scanning electron microscopy (Carl Zeiss SUPRA-55), Germany. Glucose and Silver nanoparticles was purchased from Sigma Aldrich. Silver Nanoparticles were sputtered using vacuum coating unit (model 12A4D), Bangalore.

Fabrication procedure for FET sensor was illustrated schematically as shown in Fig.1. Fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) coated glasssubstrates were washed twice using alkali and concentrated acid solutions. They were dried in hot air oven under mild temperature. Initially three electrode terminals such as source drain and gate was taken using aluminium (Al) using thermal evaporation technique on FTO substrate. The active surface area was masked before taking the electrode terminals. Then active surface area was coated with graphene using chemical vapour deposition process.Single layer graphene with 2 dimensional (2D) extended the coating with silver nanoparticles (Ag NPs) in order to decorate the surface of graphene for improving the performance of FET glucose sensor. 1 gm of Ag NPs powder was made into pellet form for undergoing sputtering process on the surface of graphene layer. Ag NPs used on graphene layer for increasing the sensitivity of the sensor with increased order of magnitude.

Schematic representation for fabrication of developed FET sensor

The fabricated glucose FET sensor potential (V) was measured across drain-source (Vds) through the Ag NPs decorated graphene membrane channel as function of applied gate voltage (Vg). The sensing behaviour was measured as direct current measurements performed with two-terminal FET having conductive gate. The drain current (Id) was recorded when the device was exposed to different concentrations of glucose in the assigned gate voltage (Vg) range. The glucose sensing behaviour was performed at room temperature under optimized conditions to test the operation performance of non-enzymatic FET glucose sensor. In order to test the developed FET sensor, an initial assessment has been made using the available equipment which was shown in Fig.2.

Initial testing of developed glucose FET sensor system

The structural presence of graphene and Ag NPs was confirmed using X-Ray Diffraction technique as shown in Fig.3. Graphene possess hexagonal carbon structure exhibited at (002) displayed the wide peak pattern centred at 2ϴ = 25.72˚ which is compared with corresponding data card JCPDS No. 75–1621 [26] and its corresponding d-spacing found to be d002= 3.4Å. The narrow peak at 2ϴ = 38.33˚ (111) denotes aluminum electrode terminals with d-spacing d111= 2.34Å and compared with existing data card JCPDS No.85-4148 [27]. The silver nanoparticles peaks patterns (200), (220) and (311) corresponding d-spacing d = 2.03Å, 1.44Å, 1.23Å respectively and their peaks are compared with data card JCPDS No.04-0783 [28]. The XRD patterns containing Ag NPs decorated graphene deposition on FTO substrate supported with sustainable glucose detection.

XRD Pattern of the fabricated Ag NPs decorated graphene FET sensor

The surface morphology of the fabricated device was confirmed by Field Emission Scanning Electron Microscopy (FESEM) as shown in Fig.4. The images showed the sheet like structure of graphene material with uniform distribution. Monolayer graphene sheet can be clearly seen at moderate and high magnification FESEM images as shown in Fig.4a, b respectively. Figure4c indicated the wrinkled graphene sheets deposited on Cu foil substrate using CVD method. The textured graphene sheet deposition decorated with silver nanoparticles (Ag NPs) on the targeted substrate was shown in Fig.4d. These non-enzymatic Ag NPs/graphene FET sensor found to possess highly interacted super facial surfaces on the substrate exhibiting high sensing behavioural performances towards glucose detection.

FESEM images ofa–cGraphene deposited FET sensor anddAg NPs decorated graphene FET sensor

As the concentration of analyte increases on the sensor interface, the conductivity of the transistor changes accordingly. This happens due to the generation of charges from the analyte concentration which in turn produces electrostatic force of attraction. In other words, the degree of depletion changes within the channel due to the charges from analytes in the solution [6]. It is worth to mention, the sensitivity of the electrode increases due to the Dirac voltage shifting and further increases the conductivity of channel for transporting the charge carriers for detecting the glucose levels. In addition, the unique thin film transistor (TFT) (graphene) carrying silver (metal) provides excellent conducting capability and universal catalytic properties for enhancing the sensor performance and also helps in promoting possible electronic movement at the electrode interface.

The sensing behaviour was verified for bare FET and varying glucose concentration levels of developed FET sensor under room temperature as shown in Fig.5. The resulting performance of fabricated FET sensor was examined using Id–Vgmeasurements in 0.1 M of phosphate buffer solution (PBS) (pH 7.4) for different glucose concentration levels (0.1 µM–0.25 µM). From the figure, it was also observed that current generation (charge carriers) was increased for increasing glucose concentration levels. This may be possibly due to the effect of surface to volume ratio and geometric effect which further increased the dirac voltage shifting and conductivity of the developed FET sensor. From the graph it was also studied that, there is a higher noticeable voltage shift for higher glucose concentration which was tabulated inset table in Fig.5and happened due to the surface oxidization of Ag decorated graphene ion selective membrane (ISM) leading to AgO-graphene production due to reaction with biomolecules (analytes). The possible mechanism behind the significant sensing behaviour was indicated in Eq. 1. Further aimed in exposing the state that oxidation of Ag NPs that have tendency to dissolute as Ag+when gets reacted with oxidizing agents. The Ag+metal gets affected by oxygen that is present in medium and glucose environment.

FET sensor transfer characteristics towards glucose detection

The linear regression curves for varying potential have been plotted for both bare and treated FET sensor. To evaluate the sensing behaviour of developed FET sensor, the average current response were calculated in the range 0.68–1.21 V for each concentration and their corresponding calibration curve has been plot as shown in Fig.6.In general, graphene has stretchable 2 dimensional (2D) crystalline form of carbon and helps in providing high degree of flexibility enabling high surface area i.e., 2630 m2/g for single layer graphene thus assists in delivering sensitivity for developed sensor system [19]. Figure6a reports the sensitivity of bare FET sensor was determined to be 2.624 µA/µM cm−2. With increasing the gate voltage levels, their characteristic electronic behavior was investigated across the drain-source current which helps for detection purposes. Then with increasing the concentration levels of glucose, their sensing behavior was examined across the drain-source current. It was evidencing from graphene—arrangement of carbon carries two-dimensional monolayer surface was interfaced with Ag NPs forming a compatible surface binding capacity [29] for the detection of glucose molecules.

Linear plot characteristics ofabare FET andbdifferent glucose concentration levels

The linear plot for untreated FET sensor performance was observed based on current response for different potential responses and found to empower the sensing behavioural characteristics of developed transistor. Enhanced sensitivity performance was observed for difference glucose concentration levels treated FET sensor found to be 9.959 µA/µMcm−2as shown in Fig.6b. The improved glucose sensor performance was compared with previously reported sensors as shown in Table1. It was inferred from Table1that, [34] reported using Graphene/Cu NPs/ GCE in linear range 5 μM−0.2 mM with high sensitivity 607 μA/mM indicating the greater sensing characteristics due to carbon- metal NPs combinations on GCE. It was noticed that, graphene excellent support on Cu nanoparticles could provide inspired detection towards glucose oxidation. Similar interfacial effect was observed for our glucose sensor and reported in this research work with extended great performance towards linear range, sensitivity and stability based properties. Moreover, FET sensor with required surface area deposited using Ag NPs/graphene helps in facilitating enhanced interaction between targeted analytes and materials. Thus our glucose sensor witnessing high sensitivity with small dimensions enables fast adsorption characteristics towards the analytes (glucose concentration levels).

In order to evaluate the selective behaviour of the FET sensor, their performance was tested using two samples of PBS solution i.e. sample (a) contains 0.25 µM of glucose concentration and sample (b) contains 0.25 µM glucose and low concentration (0.1 µM) of each inferring species (formaldehyde, melamine and uric acid) as shown in Fig.7. The response of a sensor is evaluated using the presence of glucose as a major contribution of a sample which has to be added with sample containing a low concentration of interfering species. The interference ions arising from the other electro-active compounds and oxygen-containing inorganic species [36,37] are expected to coexist in the sample solution. The impact towards the interference ions have slight decrease in response level due to the inter compounds interaction between the existing glucose compound. From our existing analytical interference data, electroactive species of glucose and other oxygen containing compounds do not interfere with the glucose but the stripping current varies slightly. Supplementary experiments have been performed in our laboratory and it was observed that, the developed sensor avoids the other compounds (-COOH, -OH). Also it was noticed to ponder about the behavioural response towards the electroactive species (glucose) whose potentials found to be more than 0.6 V and it gets increased for increasing concentration levels. Thus developed sensor showed significant satisfactory effects towards the interfering ions which helped to proceed for stability tests. In addition to selectivity behaviour, reproducibility of fabricated FET sensor was evaluated by repetitive laboratory tests twice a week which was carried out for 10 weeks. On continuous testing, sensor maintained the response for about maximum weeks of storage suggesting the developed electrode is flexible with several environmental measurement conditions.

Behaviour of the selectivity characteristics of glucose sensor with different interfering species

In summary, non-enzymatic glucose based FET sensor using Ag NPs decorated graphene has been successfully implemented for the detection of glucose concentration levels. The potential was measured between source-drain terminals on FTO substrates. The surface modification of Ag NPs on graphene helps in increasing the surface area for enhanced glucose sensing. The fabricated sensor showed a wide-linear range, high sensitivity and low detection limit. The favourable selective behaviour towards the glucose concentration was tested with presence of different interference species. Furthermore, FET glucose sensor with affordable high performance analytical results helps in potential practical clinical and industrial applications.

E.G. Spanakis, F. Chiarugi, A. Kouroubali et al., Diabetes management using modern information and communication technologies and new care models. Interact J. Med. Res.1(2), e8 (2012)

PubMedPubMed CentralGoogle Scholar

Y.H. Lin, F. Lu, Y. Tu, Z.F. Ren, Glucose biosensors based on carbon nanotubes nanoelectrodes ensembles. Nano. Lett.4, 191–195 (2014)

Google Scholar

P. Si, Y. Huang, T. Wang, J. Ma, Nanomaterials for electrochemical non enzymatic glucose biosensor. RSC Adv. Rev.3(11), 3487–3502 (2013)

CASGoogle Scholar

K.E. Toghill, R.G. Compton, Electrochemical non-enzymatic glucose sensor: a persepective and an evaluation. Int. J. Electrochem. Sci.5, 1246–1301 (2010)

X. Zong, R. Zhu, ZnO nanorod-based FET biosensor for continuous glucose monitoring. Sens. Actuators B Chem.255, 2448–2453 (2018)

Y.-C. Syu, W.-E. Hsu, C.-T. Lin, Review—field-effect transistor biosensing: devices and clinical applications. ECS J. Solid State Sci. Technol.7(7), Q3196–Q3207 (2018)

M. Kaisti, Detection principles of biological and chemical FET sensors. Biosens. Bioelectron.98, 437–448 (2017)

CASPubMedGoogle Scholar

A. Nehra, K.P. Singh, Current trends in nanomaterial embedded field effect transistor-based biosensor. Biosens. Bioelectron.74, 731–743 (2015)

X. Gong, Y. Gu, F. Zhang, Z. Liu, Y. Li, G. Chen, B. Wang, High-performance non-enzymatic glucose sensors based on CoNiCu alloy nanotubes arrays prepared by electrodeposition. Front. Mater.6(3), 1–9 (2019)

K.J. Cash, H.A. Clark, Nanosensors and nanomaterials formonitoring glucose in diabetes. Trends Mol Med.16(12), 584–593 (2010)

CASPubMedPubMed CentralGoogle Scholar

S. Viswanathan, T.N. Narayanan, K. Aran, K.D. Fink, J. Paredes, P.M. Ajayan, S. Filipek, P. Miszta, H.C. Tekin, F. Inci, U. Demirci, P. Li, K.I. Bolotin, D. Liepmann, V. Renugopalakrishanan, Graphene–protein field effect biosensors: glucose sensing. Mater. Today18(9), 513–522 (2015)

Z. Hao, Y. Zhu, X. Wang, P.G. Rotti, C. Di Marco, S.R. Tyler, X. Zhao, J.F. Engelhardt, J. Hone, Q. Lin, Real-time monitoring of insulin using a graphene field-effect transistor aptameric nanosensor. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces9, 27504–27511 (2017)

M.A. Amir, A. Al-Mokaram, R. Yahya, M.M. Abdi, H.N.M.E. Mahmud, The development of non-enzymatic glucose biosensors based on electrochemically prepared polypyrrole–chitosan–titanium dioxide nanocomposite films. Nanomaterials7, 129–141 (2017)

M. Zhang, C. Liao, C.H. Mak, P. You, C.L. Mak, F. Yan, Highly sensitive glucose sensors based on enzyme-modified whole-graphene solution-gated transistors. Sci. Rep.5(08311), 1–6 (2015)

A.K. Geim, K.S. Novoselov, The rise of graphene. Nat. Mater.6(3), 183–191 (2007)

P.K. Kannan, D.J. Late, H. Morgan, C. Rout, S, Recent developments in 2D layered inorganic nanomaterials for sensing. Nanoscale7(32), 13293–13312 (2015)

B. Zhan, C. Li, J. Yang, G. Jenkins, W. Huang, X. Dong, Graphene field-effect transistor and its application for electronic sensing. Small10(20), 4042–4065 (2014)

J. Yan, T. Zhong, W. Qi, H. Wang, The application of assembled inorganic and organic hybrid nanoarchitecture of Prussian blue/polymers/graphene in glucose biosensing. J InorgOrganometPolym25, 275–281 (2015)

K.S. Novoselov, A.K. Geim, S.V. Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S.V. Dubonos, I.V. Grigorieva, A.A. Firsov, Electric field effect in atomically thin carbon films. Science306, 666–669 (2004)

D.-U.-J. Jung, R. Ahmad, Y.-B. Hahn, Non-enzymatic flexible field-effect transistor based glucose sensor fabricated using NiO quantum dots modified ZnO nanorods. J. Colloid Interface Sci.512, 21–28 (2018)

R. Ahmad, N. Tripathy, M. Sang Ahn, K.S. Bhat, T. Mahmoudi, Y. Wang, J.Y. Yoo, D. Kwon, H.Y. Yang, Y.B. Hahn, Highly efficient non-enzymatic glucose sensor based on CuO modified vertically-grown ZnO nanorods on electrode. Sci. Rep.7(5715), 1–10 (2017)

A.A. Ensafi, N. Zandi-Atashbar, B. Rezaei, M. Ghiaci, M.E. Chermahini, P. Moshiri, Non-enzymatic glucose electrochemical sensor based on silver nanoparticle decorated organic functionalized multiwall carbon nanotubes. RSC Adv.6(65), 60926–60932 (2016)

G. Padmalaya, B.S. Sreeja, P.D. Kumar, S. Radha, V. Poornima, M. Arivanandan, S. Shrestha, T.S. Uma, A facile synthesis of cellulose acetate functionalized zinc oxide nanocomposite for electrochemical sensing of cadmium ions. J Inorg. Organo. Met. Polym. Mater29(3), 989–999 (2018)

N. Tripathy, D.-H. Kim, Metal oxide modified ZnO nanomaterials for biosensor applications. Nano Converg.5(27), 1–10 (2018)

Y.H. Kwak, D.S. Choi, Y.N. Kim, H. Kim, Flexible glucose sensor using CVD-grown graphene-based field effect transistor. Biosens. Bioelectron.37, 82–87 (2012)

F.T. Johra, J.-W. Lee, W.-G. Jung, Facile and safe graphene preparation on solution based platform. J. Ind. Eng. Chem.20(5), 2883–2887 (2014)

A. Maleki, A.R. Taherizadeh, H.K. Issa, B. Niroumand, A.R. Allafchian, A. Ghaei, Development of a new magnetic aluminum matrix nanocomposite. Ceram. Int.44(13), 15079–15085 (2018)

T. Theivasanthi, M. Alagar, Electrolytic synthesis and characterization of silver nanopowder. Nano Biomed. Eng.4(2), 58–65 (2012)

A. Angelova, M. Ollivon, A. Campitelli, C. Bourgaux, Lipid cubic phases as stable nanochannel network structures for protein biochip development: X-ray diffraction study. Langmuir19, 6928–6935 (2003)

K.B. Male, S. Hrapovic, Y. Liu, D. Wang, J.H.T. Luong, Electrochemical detection of carbohydrates using copper Nanoparticles and Nanotubes. Anal. Chim. Acta516, 35–41 (2004)

A.A. Cagang, I.H. Abidi, A. Tyagi, J. Hu, F. Xu, T.J. Lu, Z. Luo, Graphene based FET in two dimensional paper networks. Anal. Chim.Acta101, 917–928 (2016)

C. Liao, C. Mak, M. Zhang, H.L. Chan, F. Yan, Flexible organic electrochemical transistor for high selective enzyme biosensor and used for saliva testing. Adv. Mater27(4), 676–681 (2015)

W. Wang, L. Zhang, S. Tong, X. Li, W. Song, Three dimensional network films of electrospun copper oxide nanofibers for glucose. Biosens. Bioelectron.25(4), 708–714 (2009)

J. Luo, H.Y. Zhang, S.S. Jiang, J.Q. Jiang, X.Y. Lu, Facile one step electrochemical fabrication of non-enzymatic glucose selective glassy carbon electrode modified with copper nanoparticles & graphene. MicrochimicaActa177, 485–490 (2012)

P. Luo, F. Zhang, R.P. Baldwin, Comparison of metallic electrode for constant potential amperometric detection of aminoacid& related compound in flow system. Anal. Chim. Acta244, 169–178 (1991)

G. Liu, Y. Lin, Electrochemical sensor for organophosphate pesticides and nerve agents using zirconia nanoparticles as selective sorbents. Anal. Chem.77, 5894–5901 (2005)

W. Lu, X. Qin, S. Liu, G. Chang, Y. Zhang, Y. Luo, A.M. Asiri, A.O. Al-Youbi, X. Sun, Economical, green synthesis of fluorescent carbon nanoparticles and their use as probes for sensitive and selective detection of Mercury(II) ions. Anal. Chem.84, 5351–5357 (2012)

Download references

Materials and MEMS Laboratory, Department of Electronics and Communication Engineering, SSN College of Engineering, Kalavakkam, Tamil Nadu, 603110, India

R Archana, BS Sreeja, KK Nagarajan, S Radha & G Padmalaya

SSN Research Centre, SSN College of Engineering, Kalavakkam, Tamil Nadu, 603110, India

P BalajiBhargav & C Balaji

You can also search for this author inPubMedGoogle Scholar

Correspondence toG Padmalaya.

Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

Reprints and permissions

Archana, R., Sreeja, B., Nagarajan, K.et al.Development of Highly Sensitive Ag NPs Decorated Graphene FET Sensor for Detection of Glucose Concentration.J Inorg Organomet Polym30, 3818–3825 (2020). https://doi.org/10.1007/s10904-020-01541-6

Download citation

Received:08 February 2020

Accepted:08 April 2020

Published:20 April 2020

Issue Date:September 2020

DOI:https://doi.org/10.1007/s10904-020-01541-6

Anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:

Sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article.

Provided by the Springer Nature SharedIt content-sharing initiative

Advertisement

View in articleFull size image

146.137.70.67

Argonne Research Library (8200955775)  - Department of Energy DOE Labs (3000179256)  - Colorado Alliance of Research Libraries (8200982549)

© 2025 Springer Nature

AbstractIn this research work, non-enzymatic FET sensor using silver nanoparticles (Ag NPs) decorated graphene has been fabricated for the detection of various glucose concentration levels. Graphene was deposited using chemical vapour deposition technique and Ag NPs was decorated on the surface of graphene via sputtering technique. FET glucose sensor was tested under optimal conditions (pH 7.4) in linear range 0.1 µM–0.25 µM of glucose concentration levels. It was observed that, developed FET glucose sensor delivers high sensitivity which was compared with previously reported electrodes. The reproducibility of FET based glucose sensor was tested using different interfering species along with glucose concentrations. On examining the behavioural characteristics of FET sensor towards glucose detection it was found to offer a potential device for further real-time clinical applications.Graphic AbstractSimilar content being viewed by othersNon-enzymatic sensor for determination of glucose based on PtNi nanoparticles decorated grapheneArticleOpen access08 October 2020A novel biosensor based on graphene/platinum nanoparticles/Nafion composites for determination of glucoseArticle17 March 2021Plasma-Based Defect Engineering of Graphene for Optimised β-D-Glucose Sensing to Monitor DiabetesChapter© 2021Explore related subjectsDiscover the latest articles, news and stories from top researchers in related subjects.PolymersUse our pre-submission checklistAvoid common mistakes on your manuscript.1IntroductionDiabetes mellitus is one of the most incurable disease in worldwide and caused by a lack of insulin hormone secretion in the human body. Improper level of glucose in the blood leads to a number of life-threading conditions resulting lot of risks such as cardiac problems, nervous problems, stroke, etc,. In a recent survey, reports show more than 400 million people are suffered from this disease. Type-1 diabetes (T1D) is a metabolic disease, which was caused by instable secretion of insulin hormone and that can be managed through insulin injection. Also T1D individuals suffer from serious and chronic disorders, such as blindness and tissue damage.Type-2 diabetes (T2D) results with resistance to insulin and relative secretion of immune deficiency. These types of diabetes suffer from major diseases like heart and kidney stone problems. Thus, it is necessary to monitor and measure the blood glucose levels for type 2 based diabetes [1,2].With the rising demand glucose plays important role in day-to-day human metabolism process. It is very important to develop high-performance glucose sensors carrying high sensitivity, stability and low cost found to exhibit most promising traditional research in medical and healthcare applications [3,4]. Among the glucose monitoring sensors, electrochemical sensor and optical sensors are readily continuing the research area for glucose sensing applications. In general, traditional electrochemical sensor uses three electrodes that involve working electrode, a counter electrode and a reference electrode. For enhancing the practical requirements, the reference electrode of the sensor needs to be miniaturized which unavoidably degrades the sensitivity and stability due to reduction of sensing area [5]. Considering the traditional electrode criterion, in 1970 the concept based on ion selectivity FET (ISFET) was introduced for detecting biomolecules such as penicillin, DNA, proteins, enzymes, and cells [6,7,8]. Interestingly, conventional metal wire electrode is considered as ion-selective electrode (ISE) which was directly coated using ion-selective membrane (ISM) such as nanoparticles, carbon nanotubes (CNT), graphene, nanocomposites and nanostructures resulting with the simpler arrangement, smaller and inexpensive. These FET sensors using nanomaterials are found to have considerable attention because of its potential properties such as miniaturization, parallel sensing, fast response time, high sensitivity and seamless integration with electronic manufacturing processes [9,10,11,12,13,14,15]. However, multilayer coating process using nanomaterials involved with challenging fabrication procedures.Among these materials, graphene is found to provide excellent membrane activity coated on electrode device (FTO) since their tuneable and unique properties are capable of providing excellent electronic signals for presenting novel functions. In addition, graphene is a two-dimensional hexagonal arrangement of sp2bonded carbon atoms occurring within a carbon material structure. It has an amazing electronic and a mechanical property that provides excellent thermal conductivity, zero band-gap, fastest electron mobility, biocompatible and large surface area so it was used as active material in energy harvesting, biomedical and biosensor applications [11,12,16,17]. Moreover, large surface area and excellent electrical conductivity of graphene allow it to act as “electron wire” between redox centers of analytes and electrode surface. These single layer graphene could provide decreased overlapping band which ultimately has tendency to act as zero-gap semiconductor so graphene may be best possible metal for transistor applications [18,19].Many nanomaterials have been reported for non-enzymatic electrochemical and FET sensors for glucose sensing applications. Rafiq Ahmad et al. (2017) reported on CuO decorated ZnO nanorods on non-enzymatic electrochemical glucose sensor. The nanostructure CuO-ZnO hybrid exhibited on potential outcomes on sensor sensitivity due to their high surface to volume ratio. The externally modified CuO has capacity to possess excellent electrochemical and catalytic properties which enables the surface oriented electrochemical anodization for glucose detection (glucosegluconolactone) [21]. Jung, Ahmad et al. narrated on non-enzymatic flexible FET glucose sensor which conveyed enhanced sensing behaviour in different linear range of glucose concentrations. They used NiO QDs-ZnO NRs on Polyimide substrate that facilitates Id–Vgresponses for different glucose concentrations at room temperature. At high potential, NiO leads to NiOOH production that assisted in improving the sensor performance [20]. In order to reduce the structural instability of metal oxides during detection processes they are externally coated using metal oxides, polymers or metals. Ensaf et al. described on silver nanoparticle decorated organic functionalized MWCNTs for non-enzymatic electrochemical glucose detection. In this, MWCNTs was functionalized with organic ligands for effective loading of Ag NPs for improved electrochemical performance [22].It is worth to mention that previous research works brings into the knowledge on nanostructural modification with metal oxides or polymers for operative electrochemical processes that proceeds for glucose and other biomolecules detection [23,24]. These metal oxides or polymeric loading facilitates for effective redox properties for eminent detection. A significant importance has to be brought into consideration for effortless and impressive progress towards the sensor performance for glucose detection. For better execution of FET sensor, Ag NPs decorated graphene was used as glucose sensor which was reported in this research work and believed that generation of oxide layer on the surface of metal NPs has been taken into consideration. This may be due to the accumulation of biomolecules (analytes) on the surface of Ag NPs results rendering to metal oxide layer. The possible generation of metal oxide (AgO) on the graphene network during the sensing aids in superior performance and this phenomenon has not reported previously.To evaluate our research view, silver nanoparticles (Ag NPs) was employed to provide good conductivity and high performance for detecting the analytes. In addition, graphene deposition was carried out on FTO using CVD process and silver NPs was loaded on graphene using sputtering process and enabled as glucose monitoring FET sensor. For electronic FET sensors, silver nanoparticles helps to improve the surface area in sensitive signal transduction during sensing process which further helps in evaluating sensing and stability behaviours.2Materials and MethodsGraphene was grown on Cu foil by using CVD method and transferred/deposited onto the targeted substrate and the similar procedure was adopted from reported articles [25].Aluminium sheet was purchased from Sigma Aldrich with diameter 3.0 inch*0.125 inches for creating the contacts on the substrate through thermal evaporation technique. The structural and morphological analysis of graphene and silver Nanoparticles deposition was tested using X-ray diffraction (RigakuMiniflux), Japan and Field emission scanning electron microscopy (Carl Zeiss SUPRA-55), Germany. Glucose and Silver nanoparticles was purchased from Sigma Aldrich. Silver Nanoparticles were sputtered using vacuum coating unit (model 12A4D), Bangalore.2.1Fabrication Procedure for Glucose FET Sensor and Electrical MeasurementsFabrication procedure for FET sensor was illustrated schematically as shown in Fig.1. Fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) coated glasssubstrates were washed twice using alkali and concentrated acid solutions. They were dried in hot air oven under mild temperature. Initially three electrode terminals such as source drain and gate was taken using aluminium (Al) using thermal evaporation technique on FTO substrate. The active surface area was masked before taking the electrode terminals. Then active surface area was coated with graphene using chemical vapour deposition process.Single layer graphene with 2 dimensional (2D) extended the coating with silver nanoparticles (Ag NPs) in order to decorate the surface of graphene for improving the performance of FET glucose sensor. 1 gm of Ag NPs powder was made into pellet form for undergoing sputtering process on the surface of graphene layer. Ag NPs used on graphene layer for increasing the sensitivity of the sensor with increased order of magnitude.Fig. 1Schematic representation for fabrication of developed FET sensorFull size imageThe fabricated glucose FET sensor potential (V) was measured across drain-source (Vds) through the Ag NPs decorated graphene membrane channel as function of applied gate voltage (Vg). The sensing behaviour was measured as direct current measurements performed with two-terminal FET having conductive gate. The drain current (Id) was recorded when the device was exposed to different concentrations of glucose in the assigned gate voltage (Vg) range. The glucose sensing behaviour was performed at room temperature under optimized conditions to test the operation performance of non-enzymatic FET glucose sensor. In order to test the developed FET sensor, an initial assessment has been made using the available equipment which was shown in Fig.2.Fig. 2Initial testing of developed glucose FET sensor systemFull size image3Result and Discussion3.1Structural AnalysisThe structural presence of graphene and Ag NPs was confirmed using X-Ray Diffraction technique as shown in Fig.3. Graphene possess hexagonal carbon structure exhibited at (002) displayed the wide peak pattern centred at 2ϴ = 25.72˚ which is compared with corresponding data card JCPDS No. 75–1621 [26] and its corresponding d-spacing found to be d002= 3.4Å. The narrow peak at 2ϴ = 38.33˚ (111) denotes aluminum electrode terminals with d-spacing d111= 2.34Å and compared with existing data card JCPDS No.85-4148 [27]. The silver nanoparticles peaks patterns (200), (220) and (311) corresponding d-spacing d = 2.03Å, 1.44Å, 1.23Å respectively and their peaks are compared with data card JCPDS No.04-0783 [28]. The XRD patterns containing Ag NPs decorated graphene deposition on FTO substrate supported with sustainable glucose detection.Fig. 3XRD Pattern of the fabricated Ag NPs decorated graphene FET sensorFull size image3.2Morphological AnalysisThe surface morphology of the fabricated device was confirmed by Field Emission Scanning Electron Microscopy (FESEM) as shown in Fig.4. The images showed the sheet like structure of graphene material with uniform distribution. Monolayer graphene sheet can be clearly seen at moderate and high magnification FESEM images as shown in Fig.4a, b respectively. Figure4c indicated the wrinkled graphene sheets deposited on Cu foil substrate using CVD method. The textured graphene sheet deposition decorated with silver nanoparticles (Ag NPs) on the targeted substrate was shown in Fig.4d. These non-enzymatic Ag NPs/graphene FET sensor found to possess highly interacted super facial surfaces on the substrate exhibiting high sensing behavioural performances towards glucose detection.Fig. 4FESEM images ofa–cGraphene deposited FET sensor anddAg NPs decorated graphene FET sensorFull size image3.3FET Sensor Behavioural Characteristics Towards Glucose DetectionAs the concentration of analyte increases on the sensor interface, the conductivity of the transistor changes accordingly. This happens due to the generation of charges from the analyte concentration which in turn produces electrostatic force of attraction. In other words, the degree of depletion changes within the channel due to the charges from analytes in the solution [6]. It is worth to mention, the sensitivity of the electrode increases due to the Dirac voltage shifting and further increases the conductivity of channel for transporting the charge carriers for detecting the glucose levels. In addition, the unique thin film transistor (TFT) (graphene) carrying silver (metal) provides excellent conducting capability and universal catalytic properties for enhancing the sensor performance and also helps in promoting possible electronic movement at the electrode interface.The sensing behaviour was verified for bare FET and varying glucose concentration levels of developed FET sensor under room temperature as shown in Fig.5. The resulting performance of fabricated FET sensor was examined using Id–Vgmeasurements in 0.1 M of phosphate buffer solution (PBS) (pH 7.4) for different glucose concentration levels (0.1 µM–0.25 µM). From the figure, it was also observed that current generation (charge carriers) was increased for increasing glucose concentration levels. This may be possibly due to the effect of surface to volume ratio and geometric effect which further increased the dirac voltage shifting and conductivity of the developed FET sensor. From the graph it was also studied that, there is a higher noticeable voltage shift for higher glucose concentration which was tabulated inset table in Fig.5and happened due to the surface oxidization of Ag decorated graphene ion selective membrane (ISM) leading to AgO-graphene production due to reaction with biomolecules (analytes). The possible mechanism behind the significant sensing behaviour was indicated in Eq. 1. Further aimed in exposing the state that oxidation of Ag NPs that have tendency to dissolute as Ag+when gets reacted with oxidizing agents. The Ag+metal gets affected by oxygen that is present in medium and glucose environment.Fig. 5FET sensor transfer characteristics towards glucose detectionFull size imageThe linear regression curves for varying potential have been plotted for both bare and treated FET sensor. To evaluate the sensing behaviour of developed FET sensor, the average current response were calculated in the range 0.68–1.21 V for each concentration and their corresponding calibration curve has been plot as shown in Fig.6.In general, graphene has stretchable 2 dimensional (2D) crystalline form of carbon and helps in providing high degree of flexibility enabling high surface area i.e., 2630 m2/g for single layer graphene thus assists in delivering sensitivity for developed sensor system [19]. Figure6a reports the sensitivity of bare FET sensor was determined to be 2.624 µA/µM cm−2. With increasing the gate voltage levels, their characteristic electronic behavior was investigated across the drain-source current which helps for detection purposes. Then with increasing the concentration levels of glucose, their sensing behavior was examined across the drain-source current. It was evidencing from graphene—arrangement of carbon carries two-dimensional monolayer surface was interfaced with Ag NPs forming a compatible surface binding capacity [29] for the detection of glucose molecules.Fig. 6Linear plot characteristics ofabare FET andbdifferent glucose concentration levelsFull size imageThe linear plot for untreated FET sensor performance was observed based on current response for different potential responses and found to empower the sensing behavioural characteristics of developed transistor. Enhanced sensitivity performance was observed for difference glucose concentration levels treated FET sensor found to be 9.959 µA/µMcm−2as shown in Fig.6b. The improved glucose sensor performance was compared with previously reported sensors as shown in Table1. It was inferred from Table1that, [34] reported using Graphene/Cu NPs/ GCE in linear range 5 μM−0.2 mM with high sensitivity 607 μA/mM indicating the greater sensing characteristics due to carbon- metal NPs combinations on GCE. It was noticed that, graphene excellent support on Cu nanoparticles could provide inspired detection towards glucose oxidation. Similar interfacial effect was observed for our glucose sensor and reported in this research work with extended great performance towards linear range, sensitivity and stability based properties. Moreover, FET sensor with required surface area deposited using Ag NPs/graphene helps in facilitating enhanced interaction between targeted analytes and materials. Thus our glucose sensor witnessing high sensitivity with small dimensions enables fast adsorption characteristics towards the analytes (glucose concentration levels).Table 1 Sensitivity and limit of detection (LOD) comparison of proposed glucose FET sensor with previously reported sensorsFull size table3.4Selectivity Analytical TestIn order to evaluate the selective behaviour of the FET sensor, their performance was tested using two samples of PBS solution i.e. sample (a) contains 0.25 µM of glucose concentration and sample (b) contains 0.25 µM glucose and low concentration (0.1 µM) of each inferring species (formaldehyde, melamine and uric acid) as shown in Fig.7. The response of a sensor is evaluated using the presence of glucose as a major contribution of a sample which has to be added with sample containing a low concentration of interfering species. The interference ions arising from the other electro-active compounds and oxygen-containing inorganic species [36,37] are expected to coexist in the sample solution. The impact towards the interference ions have slight decrease in response level due to the inter compounds interaction between the existing glucose compound. From our existing analytical interference data, electroactive species of glucose and other oxygen containing compounds do not interfere with the glucose but the stripping current varies slightly. Supplementary experiments have been performed in our laboratory and it was observed that, the developed sensor avoids the other compounds (-COOH, -OH). Also it was noticed to ponder about the behavioural response towards the electroactive species (glucose) whose potentials found to be more than 0.6 V and it gets increased for increasing concentration levels. Thus developed sensor showed significant satisfactory effects towards the interfering ions which helped to proceed for stability tests. In addition to selectivity behaviour, reproducibility of fabricated FET sensor was evaluated by repetitive laboratory tests twice a week which was carried out for 10 weeks. On continuous testing, sensor maintained the response for about maximum weeks of storage suggesting the developed electrode is flexible with several environmental measurement conditions.Fig. 7Behaviour of the selectivity characteristics of glucose sensor with different interfering speciesFull size image4ConclusionIn summary, non-enzymatic glucose based FET sensor using Ag NPs decorated graphene has been successfully implemented for the detection of glucose concentration levels. The potential was measured between source-drain terminals on FTO substrates. The surface modification of Ag NPs on graphene helps in increasing the surface area for enhanced glucose sensing. The fabricated sensor showed a wide-linear range, high sensitivity and low detection limit. The favourable selective behaviour towards the glucose concentration was tested with presence of different interference species. Furthermore, FET glucose sensor with affordable high performance analytical results helps in potential practical clinical and industrial applications.ReferencesE.G. Spanakis, F. Chiarugi, A. Kouroubali et al., Diabetes management using modern information and communication technologies and new care models. Interact J. Med. Res.1(2), e8 (2012)PubMedPubMed CentralGoogle ScholarY.H. Lin, F. Lu, Y. Tu, Z.F. Ren, Glucose biosensors based on carbon nanotubes nanoelectrodes ensembles. Nano. Lett.4, 191–195 (2014)Google ScholarP. Si, Y. Huang, T. Wang, J. Ma, Nanomaterials for electrochemical non enzymatic glucose biosensor. RSC Adv. Rev.3(11), 3487–3502 (2013)CASGoogle ScholarK.E. Toghill, R.G. Compton, Electrochemical non-enzymatic glucose sensor: a persepective and an evaluation. Int. J. Electrochem. Sci.5, 1246–1301 (2010)CASGoogle ScholarX. Zong, R. Zhu, ZnO nanorod-based FET biosensor for continuous glucose monitoring. Sens. Actuators B Chem.255, 2448–2453 (2018)CASGoogle ScholarY.-C. Syu, W.-E. Hsu, C.-T. Lin, Review—field-effect transistor biosensing: devices and clinical applications. ECS J. Solid State Sci. Technol.7(7), Q3196–Q3207 (2018)CASGoogle ScholarM. Kaisti, Detection principles of biological and chemical FET sensors. Biosens. Bioelectron.98, 437–448 (2017)CASPubMedGoogle ScholarA. Nehra, K.P. Singh, Current trends in nanomaterial embedded field effect transistor-based biosensor. Biosens. Bioelectron.74, 731–743 (2015)CASPubMedGoogle ScholarX. Gong, Y. Gu, F. Zhang, Z. Liu, Y. Li, G. Chen, B. Wang, High-performance non-enzymatic glucose sensors based on CoNiCu alloy nanotubes arrays prepared by electrodeposition. Front. Mater.6(3), 1–9 (2019)Google ScholarK.J. Cash, H.A. Clark, Nanosensors and nanomaterials formonitoring glucose in diabetes. Trends Mol Med.16(12), 584–593 (2010)CASPubMedPubMed CentralGoogle ScholarS. Viswanathan, T.N. Narayanan, K. Aran, K.D. Fink, J. Paredes, P.M. Ajayan, S. Filipek, P. Miszta, H.C. Tekin, F. Inci, U. Demirci, P. Li, K.I. Bolotin, D. Liepmann, V. Renugopalakrishanan, Graphene–protein field effect biosensors: glucose sensing. Mater. Today18(9), 513–522 (2015)CASGoogle ScholarZ. Hao, Y. Zhu, X. Wang, P.G. Rotti, C. Di Marco, S.R. Tyler, X. Zhao, J.F. Engelhardt, J. Hone, Q. Lin, Real-time monitoring of insulin using a graphene field-effect transistor aptameric nanosensor. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces9, 27504–27511 (2017)CASPubMedGoogle ScholarM.A. Amir, A. Al-Mokaram, R. Yahya, M.M. Abdi, H.N.M.E. Mahmud, The development of non-enzymatic glucose biosensors based on electrochemically prepared polypyrrole–chitosan–titanium dioxide nanocomposite films. Nanomaterials7, 129–141 (2017)Google ScholarM. Zhang, C. Liao, C.H. Mak, P. You, C.L. Mak, F. Yan, Highly sensitive glucose sensors based on enzyme-modified whole-graphene solution-gated transistors. Sci. Rep.5(08311), 1–6 (2015)Google ScholarA.K. Geim, K.S. Novoselov, The rise of graphene. Nat. Mater.6(3), 183–191 (2007)CASPubMedGoogle ScholarP.K. Kannan, D.J. Late, H. Morgan, C. Rout, S, Recent developments in 2D layered inorganic nanomaterials for sensing. Nanoscale7(32), 13293–13312 (2015)CASPubMedGoogle ScholarB. Zhan, C. Li, J. Yang, G. Jenkins, W. Huang, X. Dong, Graphene field-effect transistor and its application for electronic sensing. Small10(20), 4042–4065 (2014)CASPubMedGoogle ScholarJ. Yan, T. Zhong, W. Qi, H. Wang, The application of assembled inorganic and organic hybrid nanoarchitecture of Prussian blue/polymers/graphene in glucose biosensing. J InorgOrganometPolym25, 275–281 (2015)CASGoogle ScholarK.S. Novoselov, A.K. Geim, S.V. Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S.V. Dubonos, I.V. Grigorieva, A.A. Firsov, Electric field effect in atomically thin carbon films. Science306, 666–669 (2004)CASPubMedGoogle ScholarD.-U.-J. Jung, R. Ahmad, Y.-B. Hahn, Non-enzymatic flexible field-effect transistor based glucose sensor fabricated using NiO quantum dots modified ZnO nanorods. J. Colloid Interface Sci.512, 21–28 (2018)CASPubMedGoogle ScholarR. Ahmad, N. Tripathy, M. Sang Ahn, K.S. Bhat, T. Mahmoudi, Y. Wang, J.Y. Yoo, D. Kwon, H.Y. Yang, Y.B. Hahn, Highly efficient non-enzymatic glucose sensor based on CuO modified vertically-grown ZnO nanorods on electrode. Sci. Rep.7(5715), 1–10 (2017)Google ScholarA.A. Ensafi, N. Zandi-Atashbar, B. Rezaei, M. Ghiaci, M.E. Chermahini, P. Moshiri, Non-enzymatic glucose electrochemical sensor based on silver nanoparticle decorated organic functionalized multiwall carbon nanotubes. RSC Adv.6(65), 60926–60932 (2016)CASGoogle ScholarG. Padmalaya, B.S. Sreeja, P.D. Kumar, S. Radha, V. Poornima, M. Arivanandan, S. Shrestha, T.S. Uma, A facile synthesis of cellulose acetate functionalized zinc oxide nanocomposite for electrochemical sensing of cadmium ions. J Inorg. Organo. Met. Polym. Mater29(3), 989–999 (2018)Google ScholarN. Tripathy, D.-H. Kim, Metal oxide modified ZnO nanomaterials for biosensor applications. Nano Converg.5(27), 1–10 (2018)Google ScholarY.H. Kwak, D.S. Choi, Y.N. Kim, H. Kim, Flexible glucose sensor using CVD-grown graphene-based field effect transistor. Biosens. Bioelectron.37, 82–87 (2012)CASPubMedGoogle ScholarF.T. Johra, J.-W. Lee, W.-G. Jung, Facile and safe graphene preparation on solution based platform. J. Ind. Eng. Chem.20(5), 2883–2887 (2014)CASGoogle ScholarA. Maleki, A.R. Taherizadeh, H.K. Issa, B. Niroumand, A.R. Allafchian, A. Ghaei, Development of a new magnetic aluminum matrix nanocomposite. Ceram. Int.44(13), 15079–15085 (2018)CASGoogle ScholarT. Theivasanthi, M. Alagar, Electrolytic synthesis and characterization of silver nanopowder. Nano Biomed. Eng.4(2), 58–65 (2012)CASGoogle ScholarA. Angelova, M. Ollivon, A. Campitelli, C. Bourgaux, Lipid cubic phases as stable nanochannel network structures for protein biochip development: X-ray diffraction study. Langmuir19, 6928–6935 (2003)CASGoogle ScholarK.B. Male, S. Hrapovic, Y. Liu, D. Wang, J.H.T. Luong, Electrochemical detection of carbohydrates using copper Nanoparticles and Nanotubes. Anal. Chim. Acta516, 35–41 (2004)CASGoogle ScholarA.A. Cagang, I.H. Abidi, A. Tyagi, J. Hu, F. Xu, T.J. Lu, Z. Luo, Graphene based FET in two dimensional paper networks. Anal. Chim.Acta101, 917–928 (2016)Google ScholarC. Liao, C. Mak, M. Zhang, H.L. Chan, F. Yan, Flexible organic electrochemical transistor for high selective enzyme biosensor and used for saliva testing. Adv. Mater27(4), 676–681 (2015)CASPubMedGoogle ScholarW. Wang, L. Zhang, S. Tong, X. Li, W. Song, Three dimensional network films of electrospun copper oxide nanofibers for glucose. Biosens. Bioelectron.25(4), 708–714 (2009)CASPubMedGoogle ScholarJ. Luo, H.Y. Zhang, S.S. Jiang, J.Q. Jiang, X.Y. Lu, Facile one step electrochemical fabrication of non-enzymatic glucose selective glassy carbon electrode modified with copper nanoparticles & graphene. MicrochimicaActa177, 485–490 (2012)CASGoogle ScholarP. Luo, F. Zhang, R.P. Baldwin, Comparison of metallic electrode for constant potential amperometric detection of aminoacid& related compound in flow system. Anal. Chim. Acta244, 169–178 (1991)CASGoogle ScholarG. Liu, Y. Lin, Electrochemical sensor for organophosphate pesticides and nerve agents using zirconia nanoparticles as selective sorbents. Anal. Chem.77, 5894–5901 (2005)CASPubMedGoogle ScholarW. Lu, X. Qin, S. Liu, G. Chang, Y. Zhang, Y. Luo, A.M. Asiri, A.O. Al-Youbi, X. Sun, Economical, green synthesis of fluorescent carbon nanoparticles and their use as probes for sensitive and selective detection of Mercury(II) ions. Anal. Chem.84, 5351–5357 (2012)CASPubMedGoogle ScholarDownload referencesAuthor informationAuthors and AffiliationsMaterials and MEMS Laboratory, Department of Electronics and Communication Engineering, SSN College of Engineering, Kalavakkam, Tamil Nadu, 603110, IndiaR Archana, BS Sreeja, KK Nagarajan, S Radha & G PadmalayaSSN Research Centre, SSN College of Engineering, Kalavakkam, Tamil Nadu, 603110, IndiaP BalajiBhargav & C BalajiAuthorsR ArchanaView author publicationsYou can also search for this author inPubMedGoogle ScholarBS SreejaView author publicationsYou can also search for this author inPubMedGoogle ScholarKK NagarajanView author publicationsYou can also search for this author inPubMedGoogle ScholarS RadhaView author publicationsYou can also search for this author inPubMedGoogle ScholarP BalajiBhargavView author publicationsYou can also search for this author inPubMedGoogle ScholarC BalajiView author publicationsYou can also search for this author inPubMedGoogle ScholarG PadmalayaView author publicationsYou can also search for this author inPubMedGoogle ScholarCorresponding authorCorrespondence toG Padmalaya.Additional informationPublisher's NoteSpringer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.Rights and permissionsReprints and permissionsAbout this articleCite this articleArchana, R., Sreeja, B., Nagarajan, K.et al.Development of Highly Sensitive Ag NPs Decorated Graphene FET Sensor for Detection of Glucose Concentration.J Inorg Organomet Polym30, 3818–3825 (2020). https://doi.org/10.1007/s10904-020-01541-6Download citationReceived:08 February 2020Accepted:08 April 2020Published:20 April 2020Issue Date:September 2020DOI:https://doi.org/10.1007/s10904-020-01541-6Share this articleAnyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:Get shareable linkSorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article.Copy to clipboardProvided by the Springer Nature SharedIt content-sharing initiativeKeywordsFET sensorGlucose levelsGrapheneSilver nanoparticlesChemical vapour depositionThermal evaporation technique