Molecularly Imprinted Polymer Interface on Screen-Printed ZnO Nanorod Field Effect Transistors for Serotonin Detection in Clinical Samples
Koel SinhaAnanya ChakrabortyZishan AhmedPiyali MukherjeePriyanka DuttaChitrangada Das Mukhopadhyay*Chirasree RoyChaudhuri*
Open PDF
Supporting Information (1)
OpenURL UNIV OF CHICAGO
Abstract

Ultrasensitive detection of serotonin is crucial for the early diagnosis of several diseases like Parkinson’s and Alzheimer’s. Most of the existing detection strategies are still not suitable for sensitive point-of-care applications. This study presents direct molecular imprinting of serotonin on the surface of three-dimensional zinc oxide (ZnO) nanorod devices connected in a field effect transistor (FET) configuration to achieve ultrasensitive, real-time, and rapid detection with a convenient and affordable approach, which has significant potential for translation to clinical settings. This strategy has enabled pushing the detection limit to 0.1 fM in a physiological analyte in real time with screen-printed electrodes, thereby resulting in the convenient batch fabrication of sensors for clinical validation. The response of the sensor with the clinical sample has been correlated with that of the gold standard and has been observed to be statistically similar.

This publication is licensed under the terms of your institutional subscription. Request reuse permissions.

Copyright © 2023 American Chemical Society
Subjects
what are subjects
Electrodes
Nanorods
Neurophysiology
Oxides
Sensors
Keywords
what are keywords
field effect transistor
ZnO nanorod
molecularly imprinted polymer
clinical samples
1. Introduction
Serotonin or 5-HT (5-hydroxytryptamine) is considered to be an essential metabolite of the amino acid tryptophan. It is an important signaling molecule in the human body and provides evidence that the serotonergic system causes numerous behavioral and physiological functions, including emotions, sleep, and appetite. The normal range of serotonin present in human blood and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) lies in the range of 101 ng/mL and 0.8–3.7 nmol/L, respectively. (1) Low serotonin levels are mostly correlated with various disease conditions such as Parkinson’s disease (PD), Alzheimer’s disease (AD), migraine, obsessive compulsive disorder (OCD), cardiovascular disorder, and anxiety. (2) Thus, the ultrasensitive detection of serotonin for the early monitoring and diagnosis of several diseases is crucial.
The widely deployed laboratory-based methods for detection of serotonin molecules are high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC), coulometry, capillary electrophoresis, enzyme-based immunoassays, and mass spectrometry, which have precise sensitivity but are costly, intensive, time-consuming, and laborious due to extensive sample preparation. (3−5) Other than conventional methods, electrochemical techniques have attracted great interest due to their low cost and ease of operation. However, detection of trace quantities in physiological samples requires a secondary label, which is inconvenient for real-time, label-free analysis. In a study by Visser et al., a noninvasive positron emission tomography (PET) tracer-based detection method and its preclinical evaluation have been reviewed for very low-level detection of serotonin. (6) However, this radiopharmaceutical technique could measure the turnover number of serotonin metabolites rather than propose any direct method. Field-effect transistors (FETs) modified with target-specific receptors enable signal amplification based on the electrostatic gating of thin-film semiconductor channels by target–receptor interactions such that even low receptor occupancy measurably affects transconductance. (7) However, receptor-modified FETs must overcome two fundamental limitations: first, the electrical double layer in solution containing ions shields semiconductor charge carriers to limit gating in response to recognition events and the extent of shielding is characterized by the Debye length, which in physiological fluids is <1 nm; (8) second, small target molecules with few or no charges have minimal impact on semiconductor transconductance unless they trigger conformational changes in charged receptors within or near the Debye length or otherwise affect surface potentials. (9) To address these challenges, extended gate FET configurations with a nanofilter have been deployed for serotonin detection with a high signal-to-noise ratio. (10) Nanofiber-based flexible FETs with an extended gate configuration have also been applied for the electronic quantification of serotonin in physiological fluids. (11) However, in the extended gate configuration, the sensitivity is reduced since the biomolecule charges do not directly affect the surface potential. Serotonin has been detected by solution gated FET sensors in real time using aptamers. (9,12) However, the detection limit achieved is only 10 fM, which may be due to the lower sensing surface area. Moreover, although specific, generation of aptamers is a time- and labor-consuming process. (13) To further lower the detection limit, a recent effort has been reported where optimized zinc oxide (ZnO) nanorod FET sensors with attributes like high surface-area-to-volume ratio, minimized noise levels, and a high on–off ratio have been deployed. To achieve a detection limit of 0.1 fM, a photolithographically patterned vertical electrode configuration has been fabricated, which is both complex and cost-intensive. (14) Further, the stability of the ZnO nanorod and the selectivity of the bioreceptors were not satisfactory for achieving real-time and repeatable functionality, hindering the translation of the system into clinical settings.
As a cost-effective, specific, stable, and reusable receptor, molecularly imprinted polymers (MIPs) have undergone continuous development in bio-/chemosensors. (15) The process consists of polymerizing functional and cross-linking monomers in the presence of a template molecule (usually the target analyte). The removal of the template reveals cavities complementary in shape, size, and chemical functionality, therefore allowing the template to rebind in a specific manner. MIP-based electrochemical sensors have been extensively researched for serotonin detection in different body fluids with various nanomaterials. (16) However, these sensors have not been able to attain subfemtomolar detection limits and are also not convenient for real-time detection owing to the intrinsic limitations of electrochemical sensing. If MIPs can be integrated with ZnO nanorod FETs, it can be expected to enhance the stability, selectivity, and sensitivity, which can result in a device suitable for ultralow-level serotonin detection in clinical samples, in the real-time mode, and will be the first demonstration of its kind.
This study presents direct molecular imprinting of serotonin on the surface of a three-dimensional ZnO nanorod device connected in a FET configuration to achieve ultrasensitive, real-time, and rapid detection with a convenient and affordable approach, which has significant potential for translation to clinical settings. The use of MIP as receptors improves the selectivity and significantly overcomes the problem of the Debye screening effect since the target molecules are in direct contact with the sensor surface; thus, a larger fraction of their charges modulates the drain current, in contrast to other biological receptors. Further, MIP has been recently found to detect a broader spectrum of targets by wearable electrochemical sensors, which is quite stable in the presence of body fluids and can be reused. (17) The strategy proposed here has enabled to push the detection limit to the subfemtomolar regime, even without intermediate washing steps and deploying affordable screen-printing technology for electrode fabrication, facilitating the convenient batch production of sensors for clinical validation. The response of the sensor with the clinical sample has been correlated with that of the gold standard. Summarizing, this work is the first demonstration of a direct MIP-interfaced screen-printed ZnO nanorod FET sensor that has been translated to clinical settings.
2. Materials and Methods
2.1. Chemicals
Methacrylic acid [C4H6O2] (MAA), acrylamide [C3H5NO] (AM), and azobis(isobutyronitrile) [C8H12N4] (AIBN) were purchased from Sisco Research Laboratories Pvt. Ltd. (SRL chemicals). Ethylene glycol dimethacrylate [C10H14O4] (EGDM) was purchased from Tokyo Chemical Industry (TCI). Serotonin hydrochloride [C10H12N2O·HCl], dopamine hydrochloride [C8H11NO2·HCl], zinc acetate dehydrate Zn(CH3CO2)·2H2O, aluminum nitrate nonahydrate Al(NO3)3·9H2O, magnesium acetate tetrahydrate (CH3COO)2Mg·4H2O, and hexamethylenetetramine (HMTA:C6H12N4) were procured from Sigma-Aldrich. Dimethyl sulfoxide [C2H6OS] (DMSO) was obtained from Merck, EMD Millipore. Distilled and deionized water (DI) were acquired from Milli-Q System (18.52 MΩ-cm). All of the reagents used were of analytical grade and were used without further purification. Any other solvents and chemicals used, unless otherwise stated, were procured from Sigma-Aldrich, and therefore used without further purification. For washing and measurement purposes, a homemade phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) solution was used.
2.2. Optimization of Screen-Printed Electrodes and Device Fabrication
Figure 1 shows a schematic representation of the biosensor. Initially, the glass substrates are cleaned in acetone at 70 °C for 10 min. A high-precision hardwood screen printer made of emulsion screens and 310 polyester mesh count is used to fabricate the drain, source, and gate electrodes. Silver ink, which acts as a conductor, is used to define the electrodes. Generally, viscosity of the ink and roughness of the substrate affect the ink spreading during printing. Moreover, successive printing passes impact the metal layer thickness, which in turn modulates the roughness of the printed electrodes and subsequently the quality of the ZnO seed layer. Hence, the minimum line width and spacing between the electrodes are optimized by varying the dilution ratio and the number of passes of silver ink. The silver ink is diluted with propylene glycol methyl ether with different volume ratios. (18) The dilution ratios of silver ink are kept as 1:2, 1:3, and 1:4. Also, the numbers of passes are varied as 1, 2, and 4 print passes. The primary objective is to have continuous ZnO deposits with similar resistivity and thickness on both the metal film and glass substrates to result in equivalent densities of ZnO nanorods in both areas. This is required because the ZnO nanorods will be operated as a FET in the liquid gated condition only in the region between the two electrodes. Thus, if the resistivity of the ZnO nanorods becomes higher in the regions of the electrodes, then transconductance of the liquid gated FET will be degraded. In general, the resistivity of a metal layer increases when its thickness is decreased. Nevertheless, since the print is wet-on-wet and does not include drying after each print pass, the resistivity slightly increases after four print passes, as it results in thicker ink layers being inadequately cured by maintaining a constant curing time for all print passes. (19) Hence, the maximum number of passes is maintained at four. Moreover, as the dilution factor is increased to obtain a thin paste, side spreading of the metal paste occurs during screen printing, dictating the minimum spacing between the two electrodes. Hence, the dilution ratio and number of passes must be tailored carefully. The printing frame is placed on the glass substrate, and a polyurethane squeegee (≈40° angle with the mesh) is employed to brush the silver ink at a speed of 60 mm/s. (20) The printed silver patterns are annealed at 700 °C for 1 min. Succeeding this, Al- and Mg-doped ZnO thin films are grown using the sol–gel method in an ordinary clean bench. Zinc acetate dehydrate Zn(CH3CO2)·2H2O is blended and stirred in isopropanol at 60 °C, in the presence of diethanolamine (DEA), which acts as a stabilizing agent. For Al and Mg doping, aluminum nitrate nonahydrate Al(NO3)3·9H2O and magnesium acetate tetrahydrate (CH3COO)2Mg·4H2O are added, respectively, to the solution. After preheating the glass substrates at 300 °C for 10 min in air, the samples are dip-coated and the process is repeated 3 times. Finally, they are cured at 600 °C in the presence of moisture for 60 min to produce ZnO thin films. The Al concentration is maintained at 3% and the Mg concentration is varied from 0.25 to 3%, which are determined by energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) measurements taken on a Zeiss EVO 18 SEM instrument. (21) Following this, ZnO nanorods are grown over the thin films by the chemical bath deposition method. This method involves adding 10 mM zinc nitrate hexahydrate Zn(NO3)2·6H2O in 50 mL of DI water and stirring for 10 min at room temperature. Another solution is prepared by mixing 10 mM hexamethylenetetramine (HMTA: C6H12N4) in 50 mL of DI water and stirring for 10 min at room temperature. Both solution baths are mixed and stirred at 260 rpm, and the thin-film-grown samples are suspended for 2 h at 70 °C. After removal from the solution bath, the ZnO platforms are washed thoroughly in DI water, followed by thermal annealing at 450 °C for 30 min for better crystallization.
Figure 1

Figure 1. Schematic representation of the biosensor.

2.3. Synthesis of the MIP Prepolymerization Mix
The chemical composition of the synthesized MIP agreed with previously reported data where the imprinting factor is optimized for high specificity and selectivity for serotonin. (22) A 1:3 ratio of methacrylic acid (MAA)/acrylamide (AM) blend is used, which is reported to have a high imprinting factor of 3.64. At first, 2.84 mM MAA, 8.50 mM AM, and 2.83 mM template molecule serotonin are mixed in DMSO and kept aside for at least 20 min. This step allows the seeding of the monomers around the template molecule. (23) After this, 22.72 mM of a cross-linker, EGDM, and 0.61 mM of a photoinitiator, AIBN, are added to the solution to make the final MIP prepolymerization mix. N2 purging of the prepolymerization mix is done to prevent any oxidative degradation of the serotonin template molecule. On the other hand, the nonimprinted polymer (NIP) polymerization mix is prepared following the same experimental protocol except for preconcentrating and without adding the serotonin template molecule in the prepolymerization mix.
2.4. Thin-Film Polymerization of MIP on the ZnO Surface
The deposition of the MIP film onto the FET sensor surface is achieved by thin-film polymerization. (24) A total of 5 μL of the MIP prepolymerization mix is applied to the working electrodes of the sensing region. A coverslip is placed over the droplet, and polymerization is photoinitiated by keeping it under ultraviolet (UV) light for 15–20 min. Subsequently, the polymerization step is completed by keeping the MIP drop-cast sensor at 65 °C, inside a hot-air oven, for 30 min.
2.5. Template Removal
The template serotonin molecule was removed from the MIP functionalized sensor by washing it with methanol and acetic acid in the ratio of 9:1. The template was then extracted in 5 mL of DI water by placing the functionalized sensor in an Orbital shaker at 160 rpm, overnight. The resultant sensor after template extraction was then used for FET-based measurements and rebinding experiments.
2.6. Fluorescence Measurements
The estimation of active imprint sites was visualized using a conventional technique such as immune-histochemistry. First, both MIP and NIP were deposited on clean glass slides with the help of the thin-film polymerization technique as discussed earlier. Following this, the serotonin antibody was tagged with FITC. 1 mg/mL serotonin antibody was prepared, and a ratio of 80 mg of FITC per mg of the antibody was achieved by adding FITC from 1 mg/mL stock solution dissolved in DMSO. Then, an Eppendorf was wrapped in aluminum foil and rotated in ice-cold conditions for 1 h. After this, the unreacted FITC was removed by dialysis and the FITC conjugated antibody was stored in the storage buffer consisting of 10 mM Tris, 150 mM NaCl, and 0.1% NaNO3, maintained at pH 8.2. Next, both glass slides were incubated with the FITC conjugated serotonin antibody for 50–60 min at room temperature. Finally, the slide was washed with 100 mM PBS and kept in air for drying. This was followed by fluorescence microscopy in the green region. After this, template extraction for MIP was performed followed by rebinding experiments, with and without washing steps to estimate the nonspecific binding. After every step, serotonin antibody was tagged for fluorescence measurements. The excitation and emission wavelengths were set at 495 and 520 nm, respectively. The integration time was set to 20 μs. Relative fluorescence units (RFUs) were recorded for 10 different fields in each case and normalized with respect to the highest signal measured. Mean and standard deviation were plotted.
2.7. Electrochemical Measurements
Differential pulse voltammetry measurements were performed using a potentiostat/galvanostat (OrigaFlex-OGF500 pack, France) operated with NOVA 1.10.4 software. This was also used to characterize the active imprint sites of MIP as it is an efficient method for analyzing the signal originating from the direct electrochemical oxidation of 5-HT. (25) In order to perform the experiments, a classical electrochemical cell was used, which was composed of three electrodes: a glassy carbon working electrode (GCE; d = 3 mm), an Ag/AgCl (3 M KCl) reference electrode, and a platinum counter electrode. For these measurements, glassy carbon electrodes were pipetted with both MIP and NIP solutions prepared according to the methods discussed above and a 0.02 M PBS was used at a pH of 6.5. (25) The potential range from +0.1 to +0.8 V vs Ag/AgCl was selected to contain the value of the oxidation potential of 5-HT. Successive such measurements were recorded after template extraction and rebinding. After the rebinding step, an additional washing step was executed to estimate the nonspecific adsorption. At every step, five sets of measurements were executed. The experimental results obtained were processed with Microsoft Excel and OriginPro.
2.8. Preparation of Serotonin Solution for Rebinding Experiments
The stock solution of serotonin hydrochloride (1 mg/mL) was prepared by dissolving 1 mg of serotonin hydrochloride (molar mass: 212.68) in 1 mL of 20 mM PBS. Serial dilution of the stock was done to obtain serotonin concentrations of 1 mM, 1 μM, 1 nM, and 1 pM in a 100 mM PBS solution (pH 7.2). These solutions were further utilized for rebinding assays and subsequent electrical measurements.
2.9. Preparation of Blood Serum Samples
Artificial serum was procured. Using the clean pipet technique, approximately 210 μL of serum was transferred to cryovials and stored at −20 °C until further use. The serum samples were spiked with different concentrations of serotonin for electrical measurements of the serotonin molecule in physiological samples.
2.10. Preparation of Clinical Samples
The patient samples utilized in this study were obtained from PD patients. Patient consent was obtained before sampling, and all institutional recommendations on handling real samples taken from human subjects were followed (under the agreement of the Ethics Committee Memo No. IPGME&R/IEC/2021/304). Serum samples from 15 PD patients were analyzed by the HPLC-electrochemical detection (HPLC-ECD) method following a standard protocol. Results obtained from respective analyses were compared with the results of the fabricated sensor.
2.11. Statistical Analysis
Data obtained were expressed as mean ± standard deviation. The HPLC-ECD and biosensor data were statistically analyzed by one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) using NCSS 2022 data analysis software. One-way ANOVA was calculated for at least one categorical and two quantitative variables. The level of significance was also calculated using a paired t test for the two groups of data by GraphPad prism 8 analysis.
2.12. Electrical Quantification
A sensor holder was set up to interface each sensor chip with the PC. In the experimental setup, the sensors’ bond pads were set beneath the sensor holder probes, which were connected with drain and source electrodes. For drain current (IDS) measurements, a Keithley picoammeter/voltage source (Model 6487) was used in the experimental setup and measurements were recorded just after ZnO nanorod growth with the drain-to-source voltage being varied from −4 to +4 V in the dry condition for different sensor areas. Similar measurements were conducted after MIP polymerization, before attachment of serotonin biomolecules, in dry conditions for different sensor areas. Further, the coplanar gate electrodes were fixed to a DC power supply (E36300). The reliability of the sensor was enhanced by protecting the drain and source electrodes from direct exposure to the electrolyte to prevent leakage current using judiciously designed PDMS wells. IDS measurements were recorded in liquid gated conditions with PBS (pH 7.2, 100 mM ionic strength) for different sensor areas. Finally, serotonin measurements were taken by pipetting 100 μL of serotonin, followed by incubation for 30 min. After the incubation period, the samples were thoroughly washed. Further, IDS measurements were recorded in the presence of 100 μL of PBS solution. For real-time detection, 50 μL of serotonin-spiked serums (analyte) of different concentrations were pipetted in 50 μL of a PBS control solution on the sensor. Washing was not done here, and electrical measurements were recorded. The sensitivity of the sensor was computed as the fractional change in IDS before and after antigen capture. Five sensors were used for each measurement, and their means along with standard deviations are depicted. Patient samples were tested in the real-time mode. Figure 2 shows the experimental setup of the biosensor.
Figure 2

Figure 2. Experimental setup.

2.13. Morphological Characterization of the Sensor
Atomic force microscopy (AFM) images were taken for different dilution factors and screen-printing passes. Optical characterizations of screen-printed films were also performed. Field emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM) (Model No: ZEISS EVO-MA 10) of ZnO nanorods and MIP grown on glass was investigated for the optimized screen-printed electrode parameter. The crystal structure and unit cell dimension of the optimized ZnO thin film on glass were estimated by X-ray diffraction (XRD) (Rigaku Smart Lab X-ray diffractometer). On the other hand, the composition of the MIP film was evaluated with the help of X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) (Model No: PHI 5000 Versa Prob II, FEI Inc.). Experimental data interpretation was executed by CASA XPS software.
2.14. Finite Element Simulation
The phenomenon of molecular capture within a fluidic space was driven by an electric potential that is responsible for the transport of molecules. This exploits the electrokinetic principle of electrophoresis. A mathematical model describing the electrokinetic fluid and sample molecules was employed, which elucidated fluid motion and transport mechanisms such as diffusion and electrophoretic migration. To understand and estimate the amount of biomolecule capture by the electrodes embedded within the fluidic space, the concentration profile of the sample molecules was studied using the finite element method employing COMSOL Multiphysics 5.6 simulation software. The magnified schematic of the system geometry depicting one of the bottom electrodes, nanorods, and the buffer solution is shown in Figure S1.
Modeling of the device was performed in such a way that the device operation may be compartmented into two stages: the focusing stage followed by the injection stage. Focusing emphasized on the flow of the sample and the buffer solution, which was mainly diffusion-mediated, while injection examined the electric field-driven flow of the sample toward the bottom drain-source electrodes. The ions present in the sample solution start to migrate in the direction opposite to the applied electric field. The model was designed with the assumption of having a lower concentration of charged sample in the solution in comparison to other dissolved ions. The applied electric potential resulting in generation of electric fields was governed by the AC/DC module, while the concentration profile of the sample reaching the electrodes was obtained incorporating the fluid flow module and transport of the diluted species module. The model may be described by fundamental physical principles such as Stokes flow and Nernst–Planck equations.
3. Results and Discussion
3.1. Finite Element Simulation Results
The device was modeled with the source and drain electrodes placed at the bottom and separated by a distance of 0.2 mm. A coplanar gate electrode for application of gate voltage was also placed along with it at a distance of 100 μm. The solution placed on the electrodes was PBS. A voltage of 0.8 V was applied at the coplanar gate electrode, while the drain and source electrodes were set to zero volts. The electric potential distribution is shown in Figure S2. Positively charged molecules were injected from the top of the solution column, which got repelled from the electrode with positive voltage and confined themselves near the other electrodes. The transport of the dilute species module of the finite element simulation takes into account the interaction of molecules in the presence of a field by considering the charge number of the molecules as well as its concentration. An initial particle concentration of 6 × 105 molecules/cm3 corresponding to 1 fM analyte was introduced as a boundary condition. The concentration profile of the sample solution at the initial time is depicted in Figure S3(a). As time progresses, the molecules become more concentrated near the electrodes, as seen from the concentration profile in Figure S3(b), which clearly emphasizes the effect of voltage and, in turn, the electric field on the capture of the desired samples at the defined location by the method of electrophoretic transport.
3.2. Optimization Experiments
3.2.1. Morphological Characterization of the Metal Film
Table 1 shows the root-mean-square (RMS) roughness obtained from AFM images of samples with electrodes printed using various dilution factors and different numbers of passes. Roughness close to that of glass was observed for samples undergoing one print pass, and the optical images of the corresponding metal lines are displayed in Figure 3(a–c). Figure 3(a,b) demonstrates 50 and 30% ink spreading for 1:2 and 1:3 dilutions, respectively, after the removal of the squeegee, which hampers the geometry of the electrodes, thus having a nonuniform line width, whereas Figure 3(c) shows approximately 20% spreading for a 1:4 dilution ratio, maintaining a relatively defined geometry even after removal of the squeegee. Again, the surface roughness in Table 1 indicates that the morphology of the metal film is expected to resemble that of glass for a 1:2 dilution ratio, which might be advantageous for the growth of homogeneous ZnO nanorods. Hence, for optimum selection of screen-printing parameters, electrodes with different dilution ratios of ink for one print pass were fabricated and electrically characterized after ZnO growth.
Figure 3

Figure 3. Optical characterizations of metal lines with (a) 1:2, (b) 1:3, and (c) 1:4 ink dilutions. (d) AFM of the optimized metal with a 1:3 ink dilution and one print pass.

Table 1. RMS Roughness Obtained from AFM Images of Glass Samples with Screen-Printed Electrodes Using Various Dilution Factors and Different Numbers of Passes
RMS roughness of glass: 33.8 nm
different passes of metal paste	dilution ratio	RMS roughness (nm)
1 pass	1:2	40.25
1:3	52.03
1:4	63.84
2 pass	1:2	55.06
1:3	61.06
1:4	70.69
4 pass	1:2	60.22
1:3	71.47
1:4	81.01
3.2.2. Impact of Screen-Printing Parameter on the Electrical Performance of ZnO FETs
Figure 4(a,b) represents the IDS–VDS and IDS–VGS characteristics of the samples with one print pass and different dilution ratios. As the maximum ink spreading for the 1:2 dilution ratio is 50%, the spacing between the electrodes for all of the samples was maintained as 200 μm approximately. Figure 4 indicates that samples with a 1:4 ink dilution ratio have the highest resistance and poor transconductance despite minimum ink spreading. This may be attributed to the higher thickness of the metal film, which probably led to nonconformal growth of the ZnO layer. It is further observed from Figure 4 that samples with a 1:2 dilution ratio have a higher resistance and lower transconductance than those with a 1:3 ratio (in spite of the closer resemblance of surface roughness with glass) because nonuniform metal ink spreading causes nonuniform ZnO film growth, which further increases the roughness of the ZnO thin film and as a result increases the surface defect density while significantly reducing the IDS. This may be accounted for by the presence of greater grain boundary densities with increasing defects, which not only serve as electron scattering centers but also encourage charge entrapment, degrading mobility. (26) On the other hand, samples with a 1:3 ink dilution ratio have the optimum combination of surface roughness and ink spreading, thereby leading to a higher value of IDS. The corresponding AFM image of the optimized screen-printed electrode is shown in Figure 3(d).
Figure 4

Figure 4. Electrical characterization for different passes in varying ink dilutions and one print pass: (a) IDS–VDS for VGS at 0 V; (b) IDS–VGS for VDS at 1 V.

Hence, in subsequent sections, samples with different dimensions have been fabricated for analyzing the impact of the exposed area on sensing performance, keeping the screen print parameter of a 1:3 dilution ratio and one print pass of silver ink.
3.2.3. Morphological Characterization of Functionalized ZnO
The crystallinities of ZnO nanorods were examined by XRD patterns. It is evident from the XRD spectrum that (002) is the preferred direction of hexagonal wurtzite-crystalline ZnO nanorods. ZnO nanorods have a tendency to grow with a preferable c-axis orientation due to the (002) plane’s lowest surface free energy. A competitive growth occurs between the adjacent crystallites, until the rapid generation of crystallite overcomes the ones with sluggish growth and proceeds to the free surface. The (002) peak intensity at 2θ = 34.28° is slightly broadened, as can be confirmed from Figure 5. This broadening and the presence of a few small jumps (as noted in the data) may be attributed to the presence of oxygen vacancies, zinc interstitials, or their complex on the thin film due to the nonhomogeneity of the surface roughness, which induces an intrinsic strain between the ZnO and the substrate. Also, the presence of doping impurities for better FET action may have contributed to the small jumps. (27,28) Further, it has been previously observed that similar ZnO films of moderate crystalline quality show a desirable sensing performance with antibody functionalization. Figure 6(a) shows the vertically arranged ZnO nanorods with an approximate height of 1–1.2 μm and a wall thickness of around 250 nm. Figure 6(b) depicts FESEM images collected after template removal. The micrograph clearly depicts the deposition of MIP over the ZnO nanorod, and the entire surface is evenly covered with the polymer. Figure 6(c) exhibits the ZnO nanorod structure with efficient binding of MIP all over the surface, along with the presence of clear binding sites. To estimate the thickness of MIP deposited on ZnO nanorods, a separate experiment was performed to deposit MIP with the same parameters on a glass substrate directly. The cross-sectional FESEM image in Figure 6(d) reveals the approximate thickness of the MIP layer to be 100 nm. To evidence the deposition of MIP on the ZnO nanorod substrate along with template removal followed by template rebinding, the XPS technique was followed. Figure 7(a) depicts the XPS spectra of MIP immobilization where, due to spin–orbital coupling, the Zn 2p core levels are split into two levels of different binding energies such as 2p1/2 and 2p3/2. Both levels depict binding energies in the range of 1021.8 and 1044.8 eV in ZnO, respectively. In Figure 7(b), the core-level N 1s behavior is depicted with the divided components of N–H (401.27 eV), N–O (402.62 eV), and N–H2 (400.19 eV) corresponding to MIP immobilized with the serotonin template. The assigned N–H and N–H2 components at 401.27 and 400.19 eV, respectively, were found to have originated from our targeted biomolecule 5-HT, whereas the assigned N–O (402.62 eV) along with the N–H (401.27 eV) peak had its source in the AM monomer present in our synthesized polymer. (29,30) However, in Figure 7(c), the N 1s spectrum exhibits two peaks of N–H and N–O along with the emergence of a novel feature N*, which proves the removal of the template molecule 5-HT from the MIP structure. The occurrence of the above feature (marked with *) evidenced at low binding energy is most likely to happen due to the deprotonation of the few N–H bonds. Besides this, the existence of sat peaks is also observed in Figure 7(c), and the occurrence of this peak is probably due to the fact that when a core-level electron is excited and, thereby, ejected by means of an incident X-ray photon, then energy will be transferred to the other electrons present within the atom, promoting them to higher energy levels. Relaxation of these excited electrons may result in the emission of extra photoelectrons with the emergence of sat peaks observed in the XPS spectrum.
Figure 5

Figure 5. XRD analysis of ZnO nanorods.

Figure 6

Figure 6. (a) FESEM image of ZnO nanorods. (b) FESEM image (top view) after the extraction of the template molecules from the MIP film on ZnO nanorods. (c) FESEM image of the MIP layer covering the ZnO nanorod surface. (d) FESEM image of the MIP depicting the thickness of the layer.

Figure 7

Figure 7. (a) XPS spectra of 2p orbitals of zinc (Zn 2p) for the nanorod substrate. (b) XPS spectra of the core-level 1s orbital of nitrogen (N 1s) for the immobilization of the MIP film. (c) XPS spectra of the core-level 1s orbital of nitrogen (N 1s) for the extraction of the template molecule from the MIP film.

3.2.4. Estimation of MIP Imprint Sites
In the imprinted membrane, serotonin is expected to be encapsulated within the cavities via various interactions between the template molecule and the polymer backbone. As the pores observed from the FESEM image of MIP are not uniform and heterogeneous, there can be nonspecific adsorption as well. Comparing the fluorescence images captured from MIP (before template removal) with NIP [Figure 8(a,b)] indicates that a significant number of binding sites have developed in the polymer matrix. After template removal, the intensity reduces significantly, which depicts the successful removal of serotonin molecules [Figure 8(c)]. The rebinding experiments with and without washing further illustrate that there is not much difference in the fluorescence intensity, thereby indicative of low nonspecific adsorption [Figure 8(d,e)]. Similar observations have been further confirmed from the DPV measurements (Figure 9), which showed no peaks in the presence of the NIP functionalized electrode, indicating the absence of serotonin molecules. Coating of the electrode with MIP results in a significant increase in current at the electrochemical oxidation of 5-HT, thereby indicating the presence of 5-HT molecules within the MIP matrix. After template extraction, the peak current reduces appreciably, signifying satisfactory removal of the template molecules. An increase in current is observed after rebinding experiments, and the small difference between the current peaks with and without washing indicates the presence of minimal nonspecific adsorption.
Figure 8

Figure 8. Fluorescence images with FITC-tagged antiserotonin antibody for (a) MIP with the template molecule, (b) NIP, (c) MIP after extraction, (d) rebinding without washing, and (e) rebinding after intermediate washing; (f) plot of RFU under different conditions.

Figure 9

Figure 9. DPV measurements in 0.02 M PBS, pH 6.5, under different conditions.

From the fluorescence experiments with an MIP-coated glass slide, performed after rebinding followed by washing, the number of binding sites in the MIP was estimated to be around 106/μm2. Assuming the dissociation constant of the serotonin template MIP to be around 1 μM, (25) the minimum number of binding sites required to achieve a detection limit of 0.1 fM is approximately 1012 from the Langmuir binding kinetics. This requires a minimum area of approximately 106 μm2. Considering both the approximate diameters and spacing between the nanorods to be 250 nm, the exposed area between the drain and source electrodes needs to be at least 0.1 mm2. To examine the effect of the exposed area on sensor performance like detection limit and range, three different sensor areas are selected: sensor S1 with length (L) and width (W) as 0.2 mm by 2 mm, sensor S2 with L and W as 0.1 mm by 1 mm, and sensor S3 with L and W as 0.2 mm by 0.5 mm.
3.2.5. I–V Characterization of ZnO Nanorods
The I–V characterization of ZnO nanorods was performed in the dry condition for three different sensing areas (S1, S2, and S3), and the corresponding graphs are depicted in Figure 10(a). The resistances of the sensors reduced after the ZnO nanorod growth as the electron transfer enhanced due to the nanorods, resulting in a high electron diffusion coefficient. Moreover, S1 and S2 had similar values of resistance since their L by W ratios were almost similar. After the MIP polymerization, similar measurements were taken for those three sensing areas in dry conditions, and the corresponding graphs are shown in Figure 10(b). As the MIP was insulating in nature, it did not contribute to the conductance of the FET channel; hence, the resistances of the MIP-coated ZnO nanorods remained similar.
Figure 10

Figure 10. Characterization of the (a) ZnO nanorod and (b) MIP-coated ZnO nanorod in the dry condition.

3.2.6. FET Characterization in the Liquid Gated Condition
The variation of IDS with the liquid gate for a fixed VDS of 1 V in the presence of 100 mM buffer before analyte incubation was recorded for sensors S1, S2, and S3 as represented in Figure 11. After incubating the sensors with different concentrations of serotonin-spiked buffers ranging from 0.1 fM to 100 pM, a washing step was performed with a running buffer (PBS,100 mM) and deionized water (DI). Similar IDS measurements were repeated in the presence of a gate and buffer. It was observed that IDS increased with an increase in serotonin concentration, which may be attributed to the positively charged nature of serotonin, resulting in carrier accumulation on the sensing channel of FET. (31) The number of binding sites was adjusted according to the required detection limit. Thus, at higher concentrations, the number of binding sites became limited, which reduced the progressive attachment or capture of the serotonin molecules with a higher concentration; hence, a saturation was observed in sensor response. Furthermore, Figure 12 shows that sensor S1 has a poor response at low serotonin concentrations and exhibits a good response at higher concentrations of serotonin due to its large sensing area and binding sites, thus achieving a dynamic range of 10 fM to 10 pM. Since the number of binding sites in sensor S3 was close to that of sensor S2, they displayed a dynamic range of 1–100 fM at a VDS of 1 V and a VGS of 0.9 V. However, to achieve subfemtomolar detection limits, the sensitivities need to be improved, which can be achieved by enhancing the diffusion kinetics of ZnO nanorods through electrokinetic capture during the incubation period of the analyte.
Figure 11

Figure 11. Characterization of MIP-coated ZnO nanorods in the presence of a liquid gate and buffer for sensors S1, S2, and S3.

Figure 12

Figure 12. Drain current for varying serotonin concentrations ranging from 0.1 fM to 10 pM after washing for sensors S1, S2, and S3.

Figure 13(a) shows the drain current sensitivity typically for sensor S3 with varying concentrations of serotonin ranging from 0.1 fM to 10 pM for different electrokinetic potentials and an associated washing step at a VDS of 1 V and a VGS of 0.9 V. The drain current was observed to increase with an increase in electric potential. A maximum potential of 0.8 V was applied to prevent the biomolecules from denaturation. Figure 13(b) shows the sensitivity of sensors S1, S2, and S3 with varying serotonin concentrations ranging from 0.1 fM to 10 pM at a VGS of 0.9 V and a VDS of 1 for a 0.8 V electric field during incubation of the analyte followed by a washing step. After electrokinetic capture, the sensitivities improved for all of the sensors and the detection limits for sensors S2 and S3 reduced to 0.1 fM. However, as the minimum dimension of sensor S2 was 0.1 mm, the reliability in fabrication was lower than that for sensor S3 since the metal contacts were patterned by screen printing, which also accounted for its reduced mean sensitivity. Hence, the optimized sensor was considered to be S3. For sensor S1, the detection limit obtained was around 1 fM since it had a larger area and the fraction of the area covered by the captured biomolecules was insignificant at 0.1 fM concentration. Figure 14 depicts the percentage change in drain current for different concentrations of serotonin at a 0.8 V electric field, with and without washing steps on sensor S3 at a VDS of 1 V and a VGS of 0.9 V. The sensitivity of sensor S3 with no wash was almost 10% lower than that of the washed sensor S3, probably owing to the interfering molecules, but due to the application of an electric field during incubation, the change in response for the minimum serotonin concentration (0.1 fM) remained above 30%, which is detectable. The transient readings of the drain current were recorded for the optimized sensor S3 after 1 pM serotonin incubation at 0.8 V electrokinetic capture without washing, which is represented in Figure 15 at a VGS of 0.9 V and a VDS of 1 V. The readings depict that the drain current of the optimized sensor reached its stability by 45 s. Figure 16(a) shows the IDS–VGS characterization of NIP-coated sensors S1, S2, and S3 in the presence of a buffer. The values decrease from that of MIP-coated sensors, which may be attributed to the decreased capacitive coupling for NIP functionalization. Figure 16(b) shows the percentage change in IDS with the serotonin concentration ranging from 0.1 fM to 10 pM after 0.8 V electrokinetic capture at a VDS of 1 V and a VGS of 0.9 V for NIP-coated sensors S1, S2, and S3 after washing. It was observed that the change in current was minimal as the NIP had very low binding properties toward positively charged serotonin.
Figure 13

Figure 13. (a) Drain current for varying serotonin concentrations ranging from 0.1 fM to 10 pM for different electric fields during the incubation of the analyte for sensor S3 at a VDS of 1 V and a VGS of 0.9 V. (b) Sensitivity for varying serotonin concentrations ranging from 0.1 fM to 10 pM after 0.8 V electrokinetic capture at a VDS of 1 V and a VGS of 0.9 V for all of the sensors.

Figure 14

Figure 14. Percentage change in drain current for different serotonin concentrations after 0.8 V electrokinetic capture at a VDS of 1 V and a VGS of 0.9 V for sensor S3 with and without the washing step.

Figure 15

Figure 15. Transient readings of the optimized sensor S3 at 1 pM serotonin with 0.8 V electrokinetic capture and no washing at a VDS of 1 V and a VGS of 0.9 V.

Figure 16

Figure 16. (a) Characterization of NIP-coated ZnO nanorods in the presence of a liquid gate and buffer for sensors S1, S2, and S3. (b) Percentage change in IDS for varying serotonin concentrations ranging from 0.1 fM to 10 pM for NIP-coated sensors S1, S2, and S3.

Interfering molecules exist simultaneously in physiological fluids, which may hamper the capture of serotonin molecules to their binding sites due to their similar catecholamine structure. Hence, the specificity of the optimized sensor S3 toward serotonin was studied with epinephrine (EP), norepinephrine (NE), ascorbic acid (AA), tryptamine (TRM), and dopamine (DA) molecules, spiked at 1 pM concentration in a buffer, without washing. The results obtained from Figure 17 depict that the sensitivity of the sensor is within 5% for such a high concentration, which indicates appreciable specificity of the biosensor.
Figure 17

Figure 17. Specificity of the optimized sensor S3 toward serotonin detection.

3.3. Testing of the Optimized Sensor for Real-Sample Analysis
For real-time detection, 50 μL of serotonin-spiked serums (analyte) of different concentrations were pipetted in 50 μL of a PBS control solution on the optimized sensor. Washing was not done here, and electrical measurements were recorded. Figure 18 shows the sensitivity for varying serotonin-spiked serum concentrations ranging from 0.1 fM to 10 pM for the optimized sensor S3 after 0.8 V electrokinetic capture at a VDS of 1 V and a VGS of 0.9 V. It also shows the calibration curve for the linear dynamic range of the proposed FET sensor. Figure 19 shows the percentage change in drain current with different serotonin-spiked serum concentrations. Error bars represent the standard deviation (ns: p > 0.05 and *p < 0.01, **p < 0.001, ***p < 0.0001). It can be observed that the optimized sensor can reliably detect 0.1 fM serotonin concentration in spiked serum. The sensor performance was also validated using serum samples collected from Parkinson’s disease patients. Patient consent was obtained before sampling, and all institutional recommendations on handling real samples taken from human subjects were followed (under the agreement of the Ethics Committee Memo No. IPGME&R/IEC/2021/304). For clinical samples, an empirical relationship was developed for the linear dynamic range to predict the unknown concentration of serotonin from percentage change in the drain current (shown in Figure 18) as given by eq 1
𝑌=𝑎𝑋+𝑏±𝛿
(1)
where a and b are fitting parameters (a = 0.09991 and b = 1.6038) along with a standard deviation of δ. Here, X depicts the logarithm of an unknown concentration and Y is the logarithm of percentage change in the drain current.
Figure 18

Figure 18. Sensitivity for varying serotonin-spiked serum concentrations ranging from 0.1 fM to 10 pM for the optimized sensor S3.

Figure 19

Figure 19. Percentage change in drain current with different serotonin-spiked serum concentrations. Error bars represent the standard deviation (ns: p > 0.05 and *p < 0.01, **p < 0.001, ***p < 0.0001).

For each sample, five sensors were tested, and the mean and standard deviation of 15 such samples were recorded as represented in Table 2. Besides sensor reading, the patient samples were also validated by HPLC-ECD. (32) The test statistic F equals 0.00011874, which was in the range of 95% acceptance. This indicates that the difference between the averages was small and that the group explained 0.004% of the variance from the average. According to the Tukey–Kramer test, there was no significant difference between the means of any pair. Therefore, we can conclude for the individual patient that the HPLC-ECD and biosensor data did not vary much and can be said to be nearly equal. On the other hand, the p value of 0.7548, obtained from the paired t test, was not found to be statistically different, which implies that the two groups of data from HPLC-ECD and biosensor are similar to one another.
Table 2. Validation of the Proposed Sensor
si. no.	sample ID	serotonin concentration measured by HPLC (fM)	serotonin concentration measured by sensor (fM)
1	A	180	175 ± 5
2	B	62	63 ± 1.2
3	C	200	202 ± 8.1
4	D	54	52 ± 2
5	E	127	133 ± 3.9
6	F	189	186 ± 3.01
7	G	96	95.2 ± 1.9
8	H	20	20.6 ± 0.3
9	I	2	2.2 ± 0.04
10	J	73	72.2 ± 1.03
11	K	82	83.4 ± 1.9
12	L	58	59.74 ± 1.4
13	M	92	97 ± 4.5
14	N	108	104.76 ± 5.02
15	O	26	26.52 ± 0.03
To understand the selectivity of the NIP-coated sensor in serum, the optimized sensor S3 was subjected to stringent controls: 1 pM serotonin in serum, 1 pM TRM in serum, and serum as a control. The sensor showed no appreciable selectivity for serotonin even after washing, as shown in Figure 20, since no binding sites were available. The percentage change in drain current for no-wash samples was more due to the random adsorption of nonspecific molecules.
Figure 20

Figure 20. Percentage change in IDS in the serum (with and without the washing step) on the NIP-coated sensor S3 for different stringent controls.

However, it is observable that the range of detection is limited to 1 pM in contrast to previous studies on serotonin with antibody-based FET where the range was 1 nM. (14) This may be attributed to the heterogeneous distribution of cavities throughout the three-dimensional (3D) structure of MIP and the molecules trapped in imprint sites located significantly outside the Debye length modulating the drain current only through the effective change in gate capacitance and does not influence the carrier concentration directly, thereby resulting in a lower sensor response. Thus, the percentage change in the drain current reaches saturation for a lower concentration of target molecules captured close to the sensor surface. This phenomenon limits the application of the sensor to a large cohort of neurological disorders like Alzheimer’s, migraine, obsessive compulsive disorders, and others since the normal level of serotonin in human blood is around 500 nM. However, the sensor can be designed to detect in the range of 5–500 nM by expanding the effective surface area of the ZnO nanorods between the drain and source electrodes, which can be achieved by modulating the formation parameters of ZnO and increasing the spacing between the screen-printed electrodes. Hence, a sensor array on the glass substrate can be realized to operate in the fM as well as the nM range, which will have better potential for clinical applications due to its capability for real-time and reliable detection in comparison to a previous report. (14) A similar approach has been reported elsewhere for sensors operating by a competitive impedance spectroscopy technique over a wide range. (33)
3.4. Reproducibility and Stability Studies of the Optimized Sensor
Reproducibility and stability of the optimized sensor were studied for five different batches of samples, which is essential in terms of clinical applications. Figure 21(a) depicts the reproducibility of the sensor by recording the sensitivity values of different concentrations of serotonin-spiked serum after various storage times at −20 °C. Around 3, 10, and 19% reduction in sensor sensitivities were recorded after 30, 40, and 70 days, respectively, which may be attributed to the denaturation of the binding sites. Also, the stability of the sensor has been examined in Figure 21(b), which shows that the baseline current IDS does not change significantly up to 70 days, which justifies the stability of the sensor up to 70 days.
Figure 21

Figure 21. (a) Variation of sensor response with different concentrations of serotonin-spiked serums after 30, 40, and 70 days. (b) Stability of the optimized sensor response with different concentrations of serotonin-spiked serums after various storage times.

In Table 3, the serotonin-sensing performance of the sensor is compared with other detection methods reported in existing studies to further verify the advantages of this sensor. The sensor developed by Yoshitake and co-workers report labeled detection with the aid of fluorescence through liquid chromatography, which is a labor-intensive and costly method. (5) Additionally, it fails to address the real-time detection mechanism. FET-based serotonin detection reported by our group using antibodies has a similar detection limit and a wider range but cannot be reliably operated in the real-time mode. (14) Moreover, the use of an extended gate reduces the sensitivity of the FET sensor since the charged biomolecule does not directly alter the surface potential of the sensor. (10) The presence of natural inhibitors narrowed the detection range of commercially procured optical sensors along with no real-time detection. (34) Few electrochemical-based sensors suffer from surface fouling effects and fail to accomplish real-time detection. (25,35,36) On the contrary, the direct MIP-coated ZnO nanorod-based FET biosensing method investigated in this paper significantly circumvents the issue of Debye screening effect since the target molecules are in direct contact with the sensor surface, and hence, a larger fraction of their charges modulates the drain current, resulting in label-free, real-time detection with 0.1 fM LOD in real samples, which is at least 100 times lower than the previous reports, even with the affordable screen-printing technology.
Table 3. Comparison of the Fabricated Biosensor with Existing Biosensors for Serotonin Detection
ref	detection method	molecules detected	LOD	linear range	validation
(5)	liquid chromatography with fluorescence detection, not label free and nonreal time	5-HT, norepinephrine (NE), and dopamine (DA)	30 pM (5-HT), 12 pM (NE), 19.5 pM (DA)	up to 10 pM	brain microdialysis
(9)	modified thin-film In2O3 FETs with deoxyribonucleotide aptamers, label free and real time	5-HT, DP, glucose, and sphinghosine-1-phosphate (S1P)	10 fM	10 fM–1 nM (5-HT and DP), 10 μM–1 mM (glucose), 10 pM–100 nM (S1P)	artificial cerebrospinal fluid
(10)	extended gate Au-FET, label free and real time	5-HT	0.6 μM	0.6–2 μM	blood
(11)	aptamer-immobilized conducting polymer nanohybrid-based solution gated FET, label free and real time	5-HT	10 fM	10 fM–100 nM	artificial serum and artificial brain fluid (CSF)
(25)	DPV using MIP-modified glassy carbon electrodes, label free and nonreal time	5-HT	1.6 nM	5 nM–10 μM	serum
(14)	FET-based detection using antibodies and nonreal time	5-HT	0.1 fM	0.1 fM–1 nM	serum
(34)	Optical sensor with a polyblendnanofiber mat by solid surface-room temperature phosphorescence, label free but not real time	5-HT	75 nM	100 μM–1000 μM	human serum
(35)	electrochemical impedance spectroscopy and quartz crystal microbalance with dissipation monitoring, label free but not real time	5-HT	1 pM	1 pM–10 μM	neurobasal medium (NBM)
(36)	DPV using a dithiobis- (succinimidyl) propionate (DTSP)-modified screen-printed gold electrode, labeled and nonreal time	5-HT	0.9 nM (buffer), 1.4 nM (serum)	10–400 nM	buffer and serum
this work	direct MIP-coated ZnO nanorod-based FET, label free and real time	5-HT	0.1 fM	0.1 fM–10 pM	human serum
4. Conclusions
In this study, it has been summarized that direct molecular imprinting of serotonin on the surface of a three-dimensional ZnO nanorod device connected in a FET configuration to achieve ultrasensitive, real-time, and rapid detection with a convenient and affordable approach has significant potential for translation to clinical settings. Additionally, the use of MIP as receptors overcomes the problem of Debye screening effect since the target molecules are in direct contact with the sensor surface; thus, a larger fraction of their charges modulates the drain current, in contrast to other biological receptors. Several concentrations of serotonin ranging from 0.1 fM to 10 pM have been efficiently measured by the sensor along with patient samples and validated with commercially available assay kits. Moreover, the detection time for 1 pM is approximately 45 s, which is much better than the existing methods. The fabricated biosensor also possesses excellent selectivity, reproducibility, and stability. In addition, this ZnO nanorod MIP FET-based system has the potential to be a miniaturized biosensing device for the accurate diagnosis of various central nervous system disorders and can be further exploited for providing a low-cost platform for the development of implantable biochips for the detection of serotonin as a disease biomarker within the brain.
Supporting Information
The Supporting Information is available free of charge at https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acsbiomaterials.3c00869.

Finite element simulation showing the schematic of the model geometry (Figure S1); electric potential distribution profile (Figure S2); and concentration profile of the sample solution at initial time (Figure S3(a)) and after a time interval (Figure S3(b)) (PDF)
S1
SUPPORTING INFORMATION
Molecularly Imprinted Polymer Interface on Screen
Printed ZnO Nanorod Field Effect Transistor for Serotonin Detection in Clinical Samples
Koel Sinha1
, Ananya Chakraborty2
, Zishan Ahmed1
, Piyali Mukherjee2
, Priyanka Dutta2
, Chitrangada Das Mukhopadhyay1* and Chirasree RoyChaudhuri2*
1Centre for Healthcare Science and Technology, Indian Institute of Engineering Science and Technology, Shibpur, West Bengal 711103, India
2Department of Electronics and Telecommunication Engineering, Indian Institute of Engineering Science and Technology, Shibpur, West Bengal 711103, India
*email: chirashree.telecom@faculty.iiests.ac.in
Figure S1. Schematic of Model geometry (Not to scale)
S2
Figure S2. Electric potential distribution profile
(a)
S3
(b)
Figure S3. (a) The concentration profile of the sample solution at initial time. (b) The concentration
profile of the sample solution after a time interval