Multiple ions detection by field-effect transistor sensors based on ZnO@GO and ZnO@rGO nanomaterials: Application to trace detection of Cr (III) and Cu (II)
Author links open overlay panel
Eun-Bi Kim a c
, 
M. Imran c
, 
Eun-Hee Lee a c
, 
M. Shaheer Akhtar b
, 
Sadia Ameen c

Show more

Add to Mendeley

Share

Cite
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chemosphere.2021.131695
Get rights and content
Highlights
•
Nanocomposites of ZnO NGs with graphene oxide (GO)/reduced graphene oxide (rGO) are synthesized.
•
Rapid multiple ion field-effect transistor (MI-FETs) sensors is fabricated.
•
A high sensitivity of ~185.32 mA μM−1. cm−2 is obtained by ZnO-NGs@rGO modified MI-FETs sensor.
•
Charge transfer at ZnO/GO or rGO interface improves the detection of Cr (III) and Cu (II) ions.
Abstract
This work narrates the preparation of efficient nanomaterials framework of zinc oxide (ZnO) nanoglobules (NGs) with graphene oxide (GO) and reduced graphene oxide (rGO) for the fabrication of rapid multiple ion field-effect transistor (MI-FET) sensors. Prepared ZnO-NGs@GO and ZnO-NGs@rGO nanocomposites were broadly analyzed by different analytical techniques to study their morphological, structural, compositional, and electrochemical properties. As electrode materials, ZnO-NGs@GO and ZnO-NGs@rGO were used to fabricate MI-FETs sensor for the detection of multiple ions such as Ni (II), Co (II), Cu (II), Cr (III), Fe (II), and Bi (II) ions. ZnO-NGs@GO and ZnO-NGs@rGO modified MI-FETs sensor exhibited excellent responses towards Cr (III) and Cu (II) ions, which presented the remarkable sensitivities of ~49.28 mA μM−1. cm−2 (Cr (III) ions) and ~185.32 mA μM−1. cm−2 (Cu (II) ions), respectively. The fabricated MI-FETs sensor displayed good dynamic linear detection of ions with low limit of detection (LOD) values of ~7.05 μM and ~14.9 μM for ZnO-NGs@GO and ZnO-NGs@rGO electrodes, respectively. Efficient charge transfer over electrode considerably enhanced the trace detection of Cr (III) and Cu (II) ions. The fabricated MI-FETs sensor platform exhibited extraordinary reproducibility and excellent stability of sensing performance and thus, confirmed delightful potential to sprout a useful tool for water maintaining system.
Graphical abstract
Image 1
Download: Download high-res image (307KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Previous article in issue
Next article in issue
Keywords
Zinc oxideGrapheneFETsHeavy metal ionsEnvironmental remediation electrochemical
1. Introduction
Toxic heavy metal ions in water have a significant negative influence on human and environmental health. Recent urbanization and massive industrialization have immensely increased the contamination of water by the existence of harmful metals ions, like Cu2+, Pb2+, Cd2+ etc. (Shumaila et al., 2019; Chai et al., 2021a,b; Akanji et al., 2020; Anusuya et al., 2021). These metal ions can easily enter in living organisms through food chain and are highly toxic, non-biodegradable and bio-accumulative which might pose threat to the well-being of humans, plants and animals (Zhang et al., 2018; Lu et al., 2019; Ma et al., 2020; Gao et al., 2018; Wen et al., 2018; Saranya et al., 2021). For example, the emission of small concentration amount of Cu2+ and Fe3+ ions can disturb the cellular functionality and metabolism of human beings however, the secretion of high concentration of these metal ions can harm the liver and kidneys, in acute stage they can cause Parkinson's disease, anemia and Alzheimer's disease (Li et al., 2021; Zhao and Wang, 2020). According to world health organization (WHO), the deductible limit for Cd, Pb, Cu and Cr in drinking water are 0.003 mg/L, 0.01 mg/L, 0.05 mg/L and 0.05 mg/L, respectively.
To avoid the harmful effects of hazardous metal ions, the technologies like ion exchange chromatography, spectrophotometry, and electrochemical methods are applied for their detection, quantification, elimination etc. (Joseph et al., 2019; Sivakumar and Lee, 2021). These methods are traditional approaches which are highly sensitive, focused on single ion detection, time-consuming, often expensive, and require specialized equipment (Yong and Hong, 2017; Anand et al., 2012). Thus, other novel methods are needed to be invented to overcome these issues and to detect trace concentration of multiple ions with convenience and reliability (Chen et al., 2020). The performances of voltametric and potentiometric ion selection yield satisfying results (Sadia et al., 2013a,b; Sadia et al., 2015; Sadia et al., 2016; Chakraborty and RoyChaudhuri, 2021), but the field-effect transistors (FETs) based sensor provides a real-time analysis comprising of a simple, ease of operation, handy portable device, in-situ monitoring, light weight, and low cost (Eun-Bi et al., 2018). Nowadays, the nanostructures and their composites are employed as electrode materials to get the best device configuration with the best sensing performance (Chai et al., 2021a,b; Hernandez-Cocoletzi et al., 2020).
Because of their unique photoelectric capabilities, optical transparency, electrical conductivity, and piezoelectricity qualities, zinc oxide (ZnO) materials have a wide range of applications in FETs, lasers, photovoltaics, sensors and photodiodes (Rensmo et al., 1997; Chakravarty and Periasamym, 2011; Sadia et al., 2012a,b). Nanocomposite of carbon materials such as GO, rGO, carbon nanotubes, multi-walled carbon nanotubes reasonably enhance the electrical conduction and effective charge transfer properties (Chang et al., 2013; Konios et al., 2014; Ray, 2015). In particular, GO or rGO based nanocomposites are promising candidates for enhancing the sensing properties (Afzali et al., 2014; Anand et al., 2014; Liu et al., 2015a,b). For instance, the modified electrode of polyaniline/graphene nanocomposite was prepared and fabricated hydrazine chemical sensor presented the reproducible high sensitivity ~32.54 × 10−5 Acm−2mM−1, reasonable detection limit ~15.38 mM with correlation coefficient (R) 0.78578 (Sadia et al., 2012a,b). Ameen and co-workers utilized GO/ZnO quantum dots thin film as sensor electrode for the low level detection of ethyl acetate (Sadia et al., 2014). Hierarchical rGO/ZnO hybrids were synthesized by G. Lu et al. and demonstrated the sensing response and LOD of 12 and 5 ppb for 50 ppb NO2, which was far better than that of pristine ZnO. In the above repost, the existence of local p-n heterojunctions between rGO sheets and the hierarchical structure of ZnO were credited with the improved sensor response (Jie et al., 2017).
In our work, we instigate a novel approach for the fabrication of ZnO-NGs@GO and ZnO-NGs@rGO modified FETs sensor for simultaneous and selective trace detection of multiple ions field-effect transistors (MI-FETs). The key feature of the fabricated MI-FETs sensor is an integrated approach of selective and simultaneous detection of multiple ions. Importantly, MI-FET sensors fabricated with ZnO-NGs@GO and ZnO-NGs@rGO electrodes pose the excellent ability to detect multiple ions such as Ni (II), Fe (II), Cu (II), Cr (III), Co (II), and Bi (II) at their very low concentrations. Among several ions detection, ZnO-NGs@GO and ZnO-NGs@rGO modified MI-FETs sensor present excellent sensing response for Cr (III) and Cu (II) ions with high sensitivities. The developed MI-FETs sensor platform has been successfully used and shows an excellent agreement with a promising reproducibility of the sensing performances.
2. Experimental
2.1. Synthesis of GO and rGO
Commonly used Hummer's method was followed for the synthesis of GO and rGO by using graphite powder (Sadia et al., 2012a,b). In typical synthesis, graphite powder (<20 μm, synthetic, Sigma Aldrich) was mixed into concentrated sulfuric acid (H2SO4, Daejung, > 95%) and KMnO4 (Daejung chemical, > 99%) was introduced slowly to the suspension. The reaction mixture was heated to ~50 °C for 1 h, deionized water (DI, 100 ml) was then added, and the reaction temperature was raised to ~98 °C. In the last step, 30% H2O2 (Samchun Chemicals, > 30%) was put into the reaction mixture and washed with enough water. Using vacuum oven (OV3, Jio Tech, Korea), the washed final product GO was dried at 60 °C. The obtained GO was then dispersed in DI water and the aqueous GO dispersion was placed into Teflon-beaker sealed into a stainless steel autoclave (CV10, ILSHIN, Korea) and raised the temperature up to 180 °C for 10 h. After the hydrothermal process, the autoclave was allowed to cool to room temperature and rGO was collected, repeatedly washed with DI water and dried in vacuum at 80 °C for 24 h.
2.2. Synthesis of ZnO-NGs@GO and ZnO-NGs@rGO nanocomposites
High-performance homogenizing method was used for the synthesis of ZnO- NGs@GO and ZnO-NGs@rGO nanocomposites. Firstly, GO and rGO (50 mg) dispersed solution were separately added in 40 ml dimethyl formamide (DMF, Sigma Aldrich, >98%) and ultra-sonicated for 30 min (Son et al., 2012) at room temperature. On the other hand, zinc acetate dihydrate [Zn(CH3COO)2·2H2O, 0.1 g, Sigma Aldrich, >99%] was dissolved in 100 ml of DMF under vigorous magnetic stirring for 60 min to obtain a clear and uniform solution. In order to synthesize the nanocomposites, the prepared GO and rGO solutions were individually added into freshly made zinc precursor solution under continuous magnetic stirring for 10 min and then heated to ~98 °C for 8 h. The obtained nanocomposites were washed repeatedly with ethanol, DI water, collected by centrifugation and finally subjected to drying at ~60 °C. The samples were designated as ZnO-NGs@GO and ZnO-NGs@rGO nanocomposites.
2.3. Fabrication of ZnO-NGs@GO and ZnO-NGs@rGO modified MI-FETs sensor
P-type Si/SiO2 wafers with an area of 2.5 × 2.5 cm2 were used to fabricate the MI-FETs sensor. Gold metal layer of thickness ~100–150 nm was used to prepare source and drain electrodes through thermal evaporation under an electrical current supply of ~70–75 A. In the next step, ZnO-NGs@GO and ZnO-NGs@rGO nanocomposite based slurries were prepared with 30 wt% polyethylene glycol (PEG, 20000, Fluka chemicals) as binder and screen printed thin film was annealed at ~400 °C for 1 h. Herein, between the source and drain of MI-FETs, ZnO-NGs@GO and ZnO-NGs@rGO were used as channeling materials. Lastly, the deposited ZnO-NGs@GO and ZnO-NGs@rGO over Au–Si/SiO2 as MI-FETs were used for the detection of multiple ions.
2.4. Characterizations of Zn-NGs/GO and ZnO-NGs/rGO modified MI-FETs sensor
The morphological images of ZnO-NGs@GO and ZnO-NGs@rGO nanocomposites were studied by using field emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM, Hitachi S-4700, Japan) and the element composition of the nanocomposites was studied FESEM coupled Energy dispersive X-rays spectroscopy (EDS). Raman spectra (Raman microscope, Renishaw) and Fourier transforms infrared spectra (FTIR, Nicolet, IR300) were employed to characterize the structural characterizations. The crystalline structure of ZnO-NGs@GO and ZnO-NGs@rGO nanocomposites were analyzed by X-ray powder diffraction (XRD, Rigaku, Cu Kα, λ = 1.54178 Å) by putting the Bragg angle range of 10°–80°. The optical properties were studied by the UV–vis absorbance (2550 Shimadzu, Japan). EIS measurements were acted upon by a two electrodes based electrochemical system by using a 10 mV ac signal and frequency range 100 kHz −1 Hz using a VersaSTAT4 instrument and contact angle measurements were performed by CTA480. Contact angles were studied by Goniometer and for the dc conductivity measurements (σdc), a simple current-voltage characteristics was carried out by applying applied voltage of 1.5 V with a Keithley electrometer (Model 617). For multiple ion sensing, at room temperature, the drain current (ID) – gate voltage (VG) characteristics were carefully measured. The gate voltage (VG) was applied in steps from 0 V to 3 V, and the drain current was measured using a floating gate (Ag/AgCl, as the reference electrode). The reference electrode was contacted with a drop of an analyte from the produced FETs in a specially designed holder case. For multiple ions sensing investigation, the different concentrations of metal ions were prepared in 10 ml PBS (0.1 M pH = 7) and dropped over channel area of ZnO-NGs@GO and ZnO-NGs@rGO nanocomposites created in between the source and drain electrode using pipette and simultaneously performed the ID-VG characteristics.
3. Results and discussion
3.1. Morphological and elemental analysis of ZnO-NGs@GO and ZnO-NGs@rGO nanocomposites
The surface morphology of ZnO-NGs@GO and ZnO-NGs@rGO nanocomposites are shown in FESEM images of Fig. 1(a–d). At low magnification mode (Fig. 1(a)), ZnO nanoglobules (NGs) are distributed on the GO surfaces. Herein, NGs are comprised of aggregated nanoparticles of average size of ~150–200 nm. A similar ZnO NGs distribution on rGO surface is observed in Fig. 1(b). FESEM images ZnO-NGs@GO and ZnO-NGs@rGO nanocomposites at high magnification (Fig. 1(c and d)) display well-defined hollow ZnO NGs attached to the surfaces of GO and rGO. Moreover, ZnO NGs are dispersed over GO/rGO and inserted into the interspacing layers, forming unique ZnO-NGs@GO and ZnO-NGs@rGO nanocomposites. Herein, GO/rGO in the nanocomposite shows high affinity to ZnO-NGs and no evidence of free GO/rGO sheets. To elucidate the element determination of the nanocomposites, the EDS analysis has been investigated, as displayed in Fig. 1(e and f). In the EDS profile plots, peaks of Zn, O and C elements are obtained which clearly confirm the synthesis of ZnO-NGs@GO and ZnO-NGs@rGO nanocomposites.
Fig. 1
Download: Download high-res image (652KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 1. FESEM images at low (a, c), high (b, d) resolution and EDS profile (e, f) of ZnO-NGs@GO and ZnO-NGs@rGO nanocomposites.

3.2. Structural properties of ZnO-NGs@GO and ZnO-NGs@rGO nanocomposites
Raman spectra of ZnO-NGs@GO and ZnO-NGs@rGO nanocomposites are shown in Fig. 2(a). As can be seen in Fig. 2(a), all characteristic Raman peaks of both GO and ZnO are present in the nanocomposites. The peak at ~468 cm−1 is attributed to E2 mode, defining the characteristic Raman mode of wurtzite ZnO (Xizhuang et al., 2020; Low et al., 2017). The appearance of peaks at ~324 and ~1108 cm−1 are due to second-order multiple phonon modes of ZnO (Kumar et al., 2015a, 2015b). Nanocomposites pose two Raman peaks including D band at ~1346 cm−1 and G band at ~1584 cm−1 where, G band is produced by the first-order scattering from E2g phonon of sp2 carbon atom (Sadia et al., 2011a,b). In addition, the ratio of D and G intensities (ID/IG) for ZnO-NGs@GO (~0.99) is larger as compared to ZnO-NGs@rGO (~0.93). The ID/IG is commonly used as a metric to assess the degree of disorder and defect in various carbon materials, i.e. the high degree of disordering in carbon materials is accounted for by a higher ID/IG ratio. (Sadia et al., 2013a,b). The results reveal successful synthesis of ZnO-NGs@GO and ZnO-NGs@rGO nanocomposites. The structural behavior of ZnO-NGs@GO and ZnO-NGs@rGO nanocomposites is further analyzed by measuring the FTIR spectroscopy. FTIR spectra of ZnO-NGs@GO and ZnO-NGs@rGO nanocomposites are shown in Fig. 2(b). The peak around ~1725 cm−1 is the characteristic stretching vibration of Cdouble bondO (Feng et al., 2014). Appearances of peaks at ~1569 cm−1 and ~1223 cm−1 are assigned to Cdouble bondC and C–O vibrational bands, respectively (Romeiro et al., 2017) whereas, the peak observed at ~548 cm−1 is attributed to ZnO (Feng et al., 2014). For ZnO-NGs@GO and ZnO-NGs@rGO nanocomposites, the vibrational peak related to ZnO retains its position at ~548 cm−1. Nonetheless, the remaining peaks (~1569 cm−1 and ~1223 cm−1) are either undetectable or have drastically reduced intensity, which could be attributed to low rGO/GO content, which is shielded by a considerable percentage of ZnO. The presence of GO/rGO peaks along with ZnO FTIR peak in FTIR spectra suggests the interaction between ZnO and GO/rGO moieties.
Fig. 2
Download: Download high-res image (483KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 2. (a) Raman spectra and (b) FTIR of ZnO-NGs@GO and ZnO-NGs@rGO nanocomposites.

3.3. Crystalline and optical properties of ZnO-NGs@GO and ZnO-NGs@rGO nanocomposites
The crystal structures of GO, rGO, ZnO, and nanocomposites are characterized by XRD as depicted in Fig. 3(a). According to Bragg's equation, the highly orientated graphite carbon shows as a distinctive peak (002) at roughly ~26.4°, indicating that its interlayer distance (d002) is around ~0.337 nm for rGO (Gong et al., 2007). After being oxidized using Hummers' method and exfoliated into GO/rGO, the (002) peak is shifted to a lower angle of 2θ = 21.3° with an interlayer distance of ~0.326 nm, indicating that the natural graphite was successfully oxidized to GO/rGO due to the presence of water molecules and oxygen functional groups trapped between the hydrophilic GO/rGO sheets (Wang et al., 2009). Furthermore, for ZnO-NGs@GO and ZnO-NGs@rGO nanocomposites, all peaks are well-suited with diffraction peaks corresponding to typical wurtzite structure (JCPDS Card No. 36–1451) (Hamedani et al., 2011; Pu et al., 2010; Low et al., 2016). d002 value of the nanocomposites has an order follows as: ZnO-NGs@GO < ZnO-NGs@rGO. Herein d002 values of nanocomposites are slightly higher than that of pristine GO/rGO, implying that ZnO-NGs are distributed not over the upper surface but also into inner surfaces of sheets of GO/rGO. The optical property and band gap of ZnO-NGs@GO and ZnO-NGs@rGO nanocomposites are studied by UV–vis studies in the wavelength range of 300–800 nm and the obtained absoption curves are presented in Fig. 3(b). Appearance of ZnO peak at ~370–380 nm is regarded as the existence of highly crystalline ZnO (Sadia et al., 2011a,b). Both samples have comparable UV–vis spectra patterns, with peaks at ~375 nm in both cases. In this case, the creation of an interface may increase the intensity of light absorption, resulting in more photons absorbed on the surface of nanocomposites and therefore improving the detection effectiveness of heavy metal ions. The calculated energy band gap (Eg) of ZnO-NGs@GO and ZnO-NGs@rGO nanocomposites are found to be ~3.31 eV, respectively. The band gap becomes narrow after rGO/GO integration with ZnO, which might facilitate the surface electric charges (Sadia et al., 2014; Tian et al., 2011).
Fig. 3
Download: Download high-res image (691KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 3. (a) XRD patterns and (b) UV–vis of ZnO-NGs@GO and ZnO-NGs@rGO nanocomposites.

3.4. Electrochemical and electrical properties of ZnO-NGs@GO and ZnO-NGs@rGO nanocomposites
In addition, the EIS has been executed to more research into electrochemical interactions of ZnO and GO/rGO onto the electrode surface. Fig. 4(a) shows a semicircle indicating the charge transfer resistance (RCT) at the interface (Sadia et al., 2016) in the high frequency region, followed by a tail at lower frequency region (Fiordiponti and Pistoria, 1989), as represented in its equivalent circuit (inset of Fig. 4(a)). In general, the typical EIS plot shows well-defined semicircles but, practically the semicircles are deformed and wide, as observed in our work. Herein, a low diameter of the semicircle for ZnO-NGs/rGO refers to a lower charge transfer resistance i.e., ZnO-NGs/rGO electrode owns a much higher electron transfer capacity compared to ZnO-NGs/GO electrode. This result again indicates that an incorporation of rGO into ZnO reduces the charge transfer resistance and improves the heterogeneous electron transfer process by the synergistic coupling effect between ZnO and rGO. To ensure further good electrical properties of ZnO-NGs@rGO, the electrical conductivity is determined using a two-probe resistivity measurement system. From Fig. 4(b), pristine FTO displays a low conductivity value of ~2.48 mS/cm. However, improved conductivities are observed for ZnO-NGs@rGO (~4.36 mS/cm) and ZnO-NGs@GO (~3.96 mS/cm) which depicts the deposition of the nanocomposites over FTO substrate. The measured electrical conductivity value of our prepared nanocomposites is in good agreement with the reported values of GO nanocomposites with ZnO (Kamrul et al., 2021). Furthermore, surface hydrophobicity of ZnO-NGs@GO and ZnO-NGs@rGO are analyzed by determining the water contact angle, as shown in Fig. 4(c). Due to the presence of GO in the nanocomposite, contact angle of ~13.89° is observed. An increase in surface hydrophobicity is witnessed for ZnO-NGs@rGO, exhibiting the contact angle of ~25.61° which refers to well dispersed morphology of ZnO-NGs@rGO nanocomposite.
Fig. 4
Download: Download high-res image (1MB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 4. (a) Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS), (b) Conductivity curves, and (c) contact angle measurements of ZnO-NGs@GO and ZnO-NGs@rGO nanocomposites.

3.5. Selectivity and sensing performance of ZnO-NGs@GO and ZnO-NGs@rGO modified MI-FETs sensor
To verify the selectivity, ZnO-NGs@GO and ZnO-NGs@rGO modified MI-FETs sensors are employed to determine 6 target metal ions and the sensor measurements are performed with mixed-ion electrolyte of Ni (II), Co (II) Fe (II), Cu (II), Bi (II) and Cr (III) ions. From Fig. 5(a and b), it is clearly observed that among the presence of other metal ions, ZnO-NGs@GO modified MI-FETs has prominently detected the presence of Cr (III) ions whereas, ZnO-NGs@rGO modified MI-FETs electrode outstands the presence of Cu (II) ions with a relative standard deviation (RSDs) of ~2.6% and 2.5% for Cr (III) and Cu (II) ions, respectively. Therefore, it is concluded that ZnO-NGs@GO and ZnO-NGs@rGO modified MI-FETs sensor shows better overall selectivity for simultaneous multiple ion detection at the same time in a single platform.
Fig. 5
Download: Download high-res image (342KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 5. (a) Selectivity test of ZnO-NGs@GO and ZnO-NGs@rGO nanocomposites.

Under optimal experimental conditions, the sensing tests are performed at room temperature and the performances of the solution-gated ZnO-NGs@GO and ZnO-NGs@rGO modified MI-FETs sensors are examined in terms of drain current (ID) Vs gate voltage (VG) characteristics. It is worth noting that ZnO-NGs@GO and ZnO-NGs@rGO modified MI-FETs electrodes have shown the good conduction pathways due to high electron mobility. From Fig. 6(a), ZnO-NGs@GO modified MI-FETs sensor exhibits the current enhancement, which increases substantially from lower to higher concentration of Cr (III) ions in the electrolyte. The increase in current might be due to the improvement in ions concentration and good electron communication throughout the reaction (Liu et al., 2010). Similar behavior is observed for ZnO-NGs@rGO modified MI-FETs sensor towards the trace detection of Cu (II) ions at room temperature, as shown in Fig. 6(b). Herein, rapid current change and fast conduction of charges from lower (10 μM) to higher (80 μM) concentrations of Cu (II) ions are observed, confirming good electron communication throughout the reaction. It is believed that the presence of hydroxyl and carboxylic on the surfaces of GO/rGO in the nanocomposites act as active sites to anchor metal ions (Geping et al., 2019). With these visible current changes, the calibration curves of ZnO-NGs@GO and ZnO-NGs@rGO modified MI-FETs sensor are drawn by extracting the average currents over the potential range, as shown in Fig. 6(c and d). By using the calibration plots, the vital parameters of MI-FETs sensors viz: sensitivity, linear dynamics, and limit of detection of sensors are calculated and summarized in Table 1 Compared to previously reported work (Table 1), the proposed ZnO-NGs@GO and ZnO-NGs@rGO modified MI-FETs sensors show the remarkable performance. The improved sensing response of MI-FETs sensor towards the detection of Cr (III) and Cu (II) are attributed to several causes. First, ZnO-NGs are deposited over GO/rGO and no free GO/rGO are observed (confirmed from FESEM), which might tend to agglomerate and decrease the effective contact area with Cr (III) or Cu (II) (Zhu and Zeng, 2017; Xu et al., 2020). Thus, the introduction of GO/rGO in the nanocomposite promotes the uniform dispersion of ZnO-NGs, assuring good metal ions penetration and transport. Secondly, the introduction of Go/rGO improves the electrical conductivity of the nanocomposites (confirmed from conductivity measurements) (Sen et al., 2014; Li et al., 2016; Liu et al., 2015a,b; Kumar et al., 2015a,2015b; Wang et al., 2011; Low et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2020). Thirdly, the Zn–O–C chemical bonds (from FTIR studies) at ZnO-NGs/GO or ZnO-NGs/rGO interface facilitates rapid electron transfer at the interface (Chatterjee et al., 2015), Finally, GO/rGO has large surface area and thus, facilitates the adsorption of metal ions (Schedin et al., 2007; Long et al., 2016).
Fig. 6
Download: Download high-res image (704KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 6. Sensing performances (a, b) and calibration curves (c, d) of the solution-gated ZnO-NGs@GO and ZnO-NGs@rGO modified MI-FETs sensor.

Table 1. Sensing performances of ZnO-NGs@GO and ZnO-NGs@rGO modified MI-FETs sensors and extracted results from reported literature.

Electrode	Target	Dynamic range	Sensitivity	LOD*	Ref.
Gold nanoclusters (AuNCs)	Cu2+	–	–	87 nM	Guo et al. (2012)
Sn02/rG0	Cu2+	0.4–1.2 μM	5.167 mA μM−1	0.1141 nM	Wei et al. (2012)
N,N′-Bis(4- methoxysalicyl idene)-l,2- diamino ethane (MSE)	Cu2+	0.3–3.0 mg L-1	–	15.3 ng g−1	Tokay and Bagdat, 2015
Gold nanoparticle (AuNPs)	Cr3+	50 nM - 50 μM	–	50 nM	Ye et al. (2012)
Carbon dots	Cr3+	10–1000 ppb	–	0.708 ppb	Pooja et al. (2019)
ZnO@GO	Cr3+	10–100 μM	49.28 mAμM−1cm−2	7.05 μM	this paper
ZnO@rGO	Cu2+	10–100 μM	185.32 mAμM−1.cm−2	14.9 μM	this paper
LOD: limit of detection.
Metal ions removal mechanism by ZnO-NGs/GO or ZnO-NGs/rGO modified MI-FETs is proposed and shown in Fig. 7. In principle, with a generated strong electrostatic field applied to MI-FETs sensor, the physio-adsorbed water molecules from PBS dissociate into hydronium and hydroxide ions. The chemical reaction can be expressed as (Sahoo et al., 2020; Chaudhary et al., 2019)
Fig. 7
Download: Download high-res image (656KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 7. Schematic of the fabricated solution-gated ZnO-NGs@GO and ZnO-NGs@rGO modified MI-FETs sensor.

The formed OH− groups are originated the highly active adsorptive sites of electrode. Metal cations in aqueous solution immediately react with generated OH− groups to create a thin layer over the electrode material's surface, as Wang et al. reported the similar observations (Wang et al., 2010). Because the quantity of negative adsorptive sites on the surface of the electrode material limits the adsorption process, the adsorption becomes poor and may achieve saturation over a period of time. In our work, ZnO-NGs@GO and ZnO-NGs@rGO nanocomposites are formed because of their suitable difference of work function. As a result, the nanocomposite is projected to have a considerable impact on conductivity, electro-catalytic activity, and the degree of metal ion solvation and adsorption. For ZnO-NGs@GO and ZnO-NGs@rGO nanocomposites modified MI-FETs sensor, GO/rGO has tendency to produce a bunch of oxygenated groups than pristine ZnO because they have surface carboxyl and hydroxyl groups. Therefore, the strong hydrogen bonds form on the surfaces of oxygen-rich GO and water molecules. The stronger hydrogen bonding holds GO/rGO and ZnO in nanocomposites and originates a large density of adsorbed water molecules, resulting in the rapid sensing behavior to multiple ions (Lizhai et al., 2021).
3.6. Reliability and stability of ZnO-NGs@GO and ZnO-NGs@rGO modified MI-FETs sensor
To demonstrate the reliability of ZnO-NGs@GO and ZnO-NGs@rGO modified MI-FETs sensor, five MI-FETs sensor devices were fabricated and checked for the detection of Cr (III) and Cu (II) ions. Fig. 8(a and b) shows ID-VG plots of ZnO-NGs@GO and ZnO-NGs@rGO modified MI-FETs sensor for five devices. ZnO-NGs@GO and ZnO-NGs@rGO modified MI-FETs sensors present negligible variation in the current values, suggesting no visible variations in the performance of five devices-based MI-FETs sensors. As seen in insets of Fig. 8(a and b), five devices of both electrodes pose the almost same current. This study clearly reflects that ZnO-NGs@GO and ZnO-NGs@rGO modified MI-FETs sensors are highly reliable for the detection of metal ions. Furthermore, stability tests are also conducted by checking the sensor performances of the fabricated MI-FETs for 40 consecutive days. Fig. 8(c) exhibits the examination of sensitivity of ZnO-NGs@GO and ZnO-NGs@rGO modified MI-FETs sensors versus days. Herein, a high level of stability with a minor reduction in sensor response for trace detection of Cr (III) and Cu (II) ions, respectively are observed. The new MI-FETs sensors present a rapid detection of Cr (III) and Cu (II) ions with highly reliable, sensitivity and low LOD.
Fig. 8
Download: Download high-res image (779KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 8. Reliability (a, b) and stability test (c) of ZnO-NGs@GO and ZnO-NGs@rGO modified MI-FETs sensor.

4. Conclusions
In summary, ZnO-NGs@GO and ZnO-NGs@rGO modified MI-FETs sensors are successfully fabricated and used for the detection of multiple ions. Among the components that make up the nanocomposites, GO/rGO has large specific surface area and covalently linked GO/rGO improves the conductivity of the nanocomposites to promoting the diffusion of metal ions. Detailed analysis of ZnO-NGs@GO and ZnO-NGs@rGO reveal that ZnO-NGs are uniformly integrated with GO/rGO sheets, which improves the hydrophobicity of the electrodes. Due to the unique structural characteristics and good electrochemical performance of the sensing platforms, linear relation is observed between ID current and the trace concentrations of Cr (III) and Cu (II) ions by ZnO-NGs@GO and ZnO-NGs@rGO modified MI-FETs sensors, respectively. Performance of the fabricated sensor platform provides fast responses towards a wide linear range of Cr (III) and Cu (II) ions with a high sensitivity, selectivity and a low detection limit. With great advantages, our simple, reliable, sensitive, and low-cost MI-FETs sensor holds a lot of promise for environmental monitoring applications. However, further functionalization on graphene derivatives and metal oxides will be delivered the encouraging electrode materials which might boost the sensitivity, sensing response, selectivity, and cost-effectiveness.
