BiVO4 nanofiber-based field-effect transistors for detection of epinephrine/adrenaline hormones†	Check for updates
Sushmitha Veeralingam ORCID logo a  and  Sushmee Badhulika ORCID logo *a  
 Author affiliations
Abstract
In this work, an ultrasensitive-BioFET (biosensor field-effect transistor) is developed for chemiresistive, label-free detection of epinephrine hormone in urine samples. Flexible surface oxidized aluminium foil is used as a substrate. BiVO4 nanofibers fabricated using a facile electrospinning technique act as an electroactive n-type semiconductor-channel deposited over thermally evaporated Cr/Ti metal contacts (source and drain terminals). The floating-gate terminal is coupled to the sensing area where epinephrine molecules are adsorbed. Detailed characterization studies reveal the formation of monoclinic-phase, 1D (1- dimensional) large surface area BiVO4 nanofibers with an average diameter of 40 ± 5 nm. The BioFET exhibits a transconductance and mobility of 2.8 μS and 5.23 cm2 V−1 s−1, respectively. The biosensor exhibits a sensitivity of 115.2 nM−1 in the sensing range of 25 nM–50 μM and 48.3 nM−1 for concentrations ranging from 0.5–25 nM with a LOD of 0.34 nM (3S/m). The fabricated BioFET exhibited a rapid response time of 0.2 s. The sensing mechanism is explained via a combination of electrostatic gating and Schottky barrier effects. BioFET demonstrated excellent stability, reproducibility, and selectivity towards epinephrine in the presence of interfering species due to the selective binding of aromatic amine with the BiVO4 nanofibers. The practicability of the sensor was tested using a test matrix of urine samples. The BioFET proves to be a reliable platform for the detection of macromolecules for point-of-care diagnostics.

Graphical abstract: BiVO4 nanofiber-based field-effect transistors for detection of epinephrine/adrenaline hormones
This article is part of the themed collection: 2021 Materials Chemistry Frontiers HOT articles
1. Introduction
Epinephrine, commonly known as the “Adrenaline hormone”, is secreted in human adrenal glands as a flight or fight response to strong emotions such as fear, anger, and anxiety, which affects the heart rate, blood pressure, glucose metabolism, and the autonomous nervous system. The average levels of epinephrine secreted in human urine range from 0–1.4 nM.1 In addition, epinephrine is used as a therapeutic drug for urticaria or angioedema, anaphylactic shock, and asthma attacks.2 Increased dosage of epinephrine in the human body leads to adverse reactions like stroke, pulmonary edema, tissue necrosis, and many unknown side effects. Thus, monitoring epinephrine levels is crucial for the early detection of numerous diseases like cardiac failures, necrotizing fasciitis, arrhythmia exacerbation, and ventricular tachycardia.3

Previously, methods like electrochemical sensing,4 chemiluminescence,5 fluorescence,6 and bulk acoustic wave7 sensors have been developed for the detection of epinephrine. However, these detection methods require expensive instrumentation, several sample pre-processing steps, and longer analysis time. Also, the issues with electrochemical sensors include (i) limited choice of highly suitable electroactive species for effective interaction with the analyte, (ii) unreliable oxidation current due to electrode fouling, (iii) charging effects and cross-sensitivity issues.8 Recently thin film-based BioFETs have acquired great interest due to their charge-sensitive property, excellent scalability, facile fabrication, and point-of-care diagnosis. The BioFETs are exceptionally selective due to the adsorption of biomolecules on the active materials and tunable liquid gate potential, resulting in reproducible sensing properties. The field-effect transistor acts as an amplifier to convert the change in gate potential to amplify the output response, which is advantageous for sensing low concentrations of macromolecules, neurotransmitters, and hormones. Thus, FETs serve as ultrasensitive, cost-effective platforms to obtain superior sensitivity, selectivity, and reproducibility in detecting various biomolecules.

One-dimensional (1-D) ternary oxides like Bi2WO6, BiVO4, NiTAPc-Gr, CdTe@NiTAPc-G, etc., have been widely employed as active materials for analytical sensing applications due to catalytic, charge transfer, and electrochemical stability.9–12 Bismuth vanadate (BiVO4) has been widely used in sensing, photocatalysis and solar water splitting applications owing to its excellent optical and electroactive properties. The layered Bi–V–O units stacked parallel to the c-axis draw properties from analogous binary oxides like Bi2O3 and V2O5. Especially, the one-dimensional (1D) mesoporous architectures have attractive properties like excellent mechanical properties. They have inspired prominent research interest because they possess robust geometry and provide more surface-active sites for efficient charge-carrier transport. BiVO4 nanofibers have been used in biosensing applications owing to their exceptional stability, unique charge transfer kinetics in 1-D, non-toxicity, and superior catalytic properties.9,10 Significantly, the one-dimensional nanostructure of ternary metal oxides is suitable for sensing applications due to the large surface area available for biomolecule interaction. The electrospinning technique is a reliable and versatile synthesis technique and is thus preferred over other methods like template synthesis, self-assembly. Hence, it's highly advantageous to develop one-dimensional BiVO4 nanofibers using the E-spinning technique for sensing applications.

This work employed electrospun one-dimensional BiVO4 nanofibers as an n-channel semiconductor in a BioFET configuration to detect the epinephrine hormones in urine samples. BiVO4 was coated over the Cr/Ti metal contacts by the drop-coating method. The FET-biosensor displayed a sensitivity of 115.2 nM−1 in a broad dynamic range of 25 nM–50 μM. The sensor recorded a minimum LOD of 0.34 nM with excellent selectivity, stability, and reproducibility. This is the first report on BiVO4 nanofibers-based BioFET to detect epinephrine to the best of the author's knowledge. The fabricated BioFET platform acts as an ultrasensitive, cost-effective, point-of-care diagnosis platform.

2. Experimental section
2.1. Materials and instrumentation
Bismuth nitrate pentahydrate, citric acid, ethanol, polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP), Ammonium metavanadate (NH4VO3), epinephrine, NaCl, KCl, Na2HPO4, KH2PO4, serotonin, dimethyl formaldehyde (DMF), Dopamine (DA), Ascorbic acid (AA), Uric acid (UA), chromium (Cr), and titanium (Ti) (99.99% purity) metal were obtained from Sigma and used without further purification. DI water was collected from a Millipore system. ZEISS Ultra-55 was used for Field Emission Scanning Electron Microscopy (FESEM). X′pert PRO X-ray diffractor with Cu-Kα was used for XRD studies, and the WITEC alpha Raman system was used with an excitation wavelength of 532 nm for performing Raman analysis. Electrospinning equipment- “E-spin Nanotech” based fully automated single pump electrospinning unit.

2.2 Fabrication of BiVO4 based BioFET
2.2.1 Electrospinning of BiVO4 nanofibers Ternary oxide solution was prepared by adding 0.8 g of citric acid to 6 mL of ethanol, 0.64 g of Bismuth nitrate pentahydrate was added to the prepared citric acid solution and stirred for 3 h. After complete dissolution, NH4VO3 was added slowly to the solution and stirred for 3 h. The polymer solution was prepared by adding 0.9 g of PVP to 5 mL of DMF and stirred for 3 h. Further, the polymer solution was added to the ternary oxide solution to obtain the precursor sol for electrospinning. The precursor sol was transferred to a 5 mL syringe for electrospinning. The BiVO4 nanofibers were spun using the commercially procured “Espin Nanotech-based single pump electrospinning unit”. The needle to collector (aluminum) distance of 15 cm and voltage of 14 kV was maintained throughout the experiment. A flow per unit time of 0.8 mL h−1 was used for drawing BiVO4 nanofibers. The spun BiVO4 was calcined at 600 °C for 2 h for complete degradation of polymers. The obtained nanofibers were further used for epinephrine sensing applications.2.2.2 Fabrication of BioFET Cr/Ti was coated onto flexible surface oxidized Al substrate using Cr target (purity 99.99%) and Ti Target (purity 99.99%). The surface oxidized aluminium substrate was masked using polyimide tape, excluding the region for interdigitated electrodes of the dimension – 3 mm × 0.1 mm. Further, the masked substrate was placed on the substrate holder, and the vacuum chamber was evacuated to the base pressure of 3 × 10−6 mbar using a turbo molecular pump backed up by a rotary mechanical pump. The rotating substrate holder and target (Cr/Ti) were maintained at 25 cm throughout the experiment. The deposition of Cr/Ti was carried out at a rate of 2 nm s−1 for 120 s to obtain a thickness of 240 nm. The thickness of the electrodes was continuously monitored using the digital thickness monitor integrated with the thermal evaporation system. It is noteworthy to mention that the data obtained from the digital thickness monitor is highly reliable as the range of thickness is >100 nm. The deposited contact acts as the source and drain for the FET. BiVO4 nanofibers were deposited using the drop-casting technique between the source and drain contacts, thus forming an n-type channel as depicted in Fig. 1. The obtained sensor was annealed at 70 °C for evaporation of the organic solvents. Further, the contacts were annealed at 50 °C for 5 min to reduce surface oxides in the contact area. The contacts for gate electrodes were taken from the electrolyte utilizing the front gate method.

Fig. 1 Schematic diagram depicting the synthesis of BiVO4 nanofibers and subsequent fabrication of BiVO4 based BioFET.
3. Results and discussion
3.1. Morphological and structural studies
Scanning electron microscopy studies were performed to examine the morphological and elemental composition of the synthesized BiVO4 nanofibers. Fig. 2(a) depicts the low magnification micrographs of the BiVO4 coated over the Cr/Ti electrode fingers. Fig. 2(b) illustrates the enlarged view of the interdigitated electrode fingers coated with BiVO4 nanofibers. Fig. 2(c) displays the high magnification image of the ultrathin nanofibers structure. The formation of ultrathin nanofibers can be attributed to the electrostatic interaction associated with the polymer and metal salt leading to the formation of metal oxide chains. The morphology was obtained at an optimum calcined temperature of 600 °C, where the polymer decomposed completely. The grain growth followed by atomic diffusion of the BiVO4 fibres assists in reapportion of atoms resulting in the formation of ultrathin nanofibers. The average diameter of the synthesized BiVO4 nanofiber was measured to be in the range of 40–50 nm. Energy Dispersive X-Ray Analysis (EDAX) spectra of the synthesized BiVO4 nanofibers are given in Fig. 2(d). The elemental studies displayed the presence of the O, V, and Bi in the atomic percentages of 71.01%, 14.99%, and 14.02%, respectively. The obtained results corroborate well with the previous reports.13


Fig. 2 (a) SEM micrographs of the nanofiber deposited over Cr/Ti electrodes (b) enlarged micrograph of BiVO4 nanofibers (c) high magnification micrographs of BiVO4 nanofibers (d) elemental composition studies of BiVO4 nanofibers.
The X-ray diffraction (XRD) studies were performed to analyze the structure of the BiVO4 nanofibers, as depicted in Fig. 3(a). The obtained peaks can be assigned to the monoclinic phase of the BiVO4 nanofibers. The diffraction peaks at 2θ = 18°, 28.6°, 34.6°, 39.6°, 42.24°, 45.48°, 49°, 53°, 55.63°, 58.5°, 57°, 63°, matches well with the JCPDS card no. 14-068814 corroborating well with the monoclinic scheelite structure of the BiVO4 nanofibers.


Fig. 3 (a) X-Ray diffraction pattern and (b) RAMAN spectrum of BiVO4 nanofibers.
The molecular structure of the synthesized BiVO4 nanofibers was analyzed using Raman spectroscopy, as shown in Fig. 3(b). The Raman spectra show predominant peaks at 129, 213, 326, 366, 718, and 827 cm−1. The high-intensity peak at 827 cm−1 is attributed to the symmetric stretching of V–O, and the lowest intensity peak at 718 cm−1 is accredited to the asymmetric stretching mode of V–O. The peaks at 326 cm−1 and 366 cm−1 are assigned to the distortion modes of the VO43− tetrahedron. The vibrational spectrum confirms stretching modes of Bi–O vibrations. Moreover, the obtained results are in agreement with the previous report.14

3.2. Transfer and Output characteristics of the Bio-FET
The FET geometry was designed using a flexible oxidised Al foil as substrate, Cr/Ti contacts as the source and drain, and BiVO4 nanofibers as an n-type semiconductor channel. The epinephrine hormone was tested in the presence of phosphate buffer solution of pH −7.2 as an electrolyte to maintain the gating effect. Cu tape was used as a floating gate electrode. The drain–source current (Ids) was plotted by sweeping the gate-source voltage (Vgs) to investigate the transfer characteristics of the fabricated FET, as shown in Fig. 4(a). The transfer characteristics were examined by changing the Vgs from −20 V to 20 V at a fixed drain to a source voltage of 1 V. A typical n-type behaviour was observed owing to the accumulation of the opposite charge carriers in the dielectric layer. The obtained leakage current can be attributed to the high electric field near the substrate-oxide interface, which energizes the electrons or holes and crosses the substrate-oxide interface to enter the oxide layer. Transconductance (gm) is defined as the change in drain current with the change in gate voltage. The transconductance of 2.8 μS was obtained for the fabricated BioFET. “Threshold voltage (VT) is the minimum gate potential necessary to obtain a conducting channel across the source and drain terminals.” For the fabricated BiVO4 nanofibers, the VT was calculated as 13.2 V. The mobility was calculated using
image file: d1qm01274f-t1.tif	(1)
where “gm is transconductance, L x W are the channel length and width, respectively, and C is the capacitance per unit area.15” The mobility of the fabricated FET was 5.23 cm2 V−1 s−1 due to the coulombic scattering and phonon scattering occurring at the given electric field conditions.16Fig. 4(b) displays the output characteristics of the BiVO4 nanofibers-based FET. The output characteristics were obtained between source to drain current (Ids) vs. source to drain voltage (Vds). A linear ohmic response was obtained for the BiVO4 nanofibers-based FET. Ohmic characteristics can be accredited to the excellent charge transfer between source and drain terminals owing to the n-type behaviour of the synthesized BiVO4 nanofibers.17 The obtained preliminary results depict the suitability and reliability of the fabricated BiVO4 based FET for detecting bio-analytes like epinephrine.


Fig. 4 (a) Transfer curve (b) output characteristics of the Bio-FET (c) output characteristics of the BioFET with increase in epinephrine concentration (d) schematics depicting the sensing mechanism of epinephrine sensor (e) amperometric response of the BioFET with the increase in epinephrine concentrations (15 nM) (f) Linear calibration curve for N = 5 sensors.
3.3. Epinephrine sensing using BiVO4 based BioFET
To electrically investigate the response of the fabricated FET towards epinephrine, the drain–source current was measured as a function of gate voltage swept from −20 V to 20 V, as shown in Fig. 4(c). The Ioff current in the negative gate voltage region is found to increase with the increase in the concentration of the epinephrine. The increase in current can be attributed to the reduction in the potential barrier height due to the negative charges originating from the epinephrine hormones.18 When adsorbed on the BiVO4 nanofibers, biomolecules like epinephrine change the band alignment and the local work function with respect to the metal contacts. Also, we can see that the adsorbed epinephrine induces a screening charge effect over the BiVO4 nanofibers, as shown in Fig. 4(d), which can be understood from the shift of the Ids–Vgs curve towards negative voltage as seen in Fig. 4(c). The 1D-nanofibers with a high surface-to-volume ratio face a higher ionic screening effect as more concentration of ions approaches the active sensing area due to enhanced surface convexity. This shift in the obtained curves towards liquid gate potential can also be attributed to partial charge transfer in the electrolyte medium.19 The change in Ids was measured only as a function of epinephrine using an amperometric technique at a fixed gate to source voltage. Fig. 4(e) shows the increase in a drain to source current with increased concentrations of epinephrine molecules. Thus, the sensing mechanism is dominated by the combination of the electrostatic gating effect and the Schottky barrier screening effect.20 The response time of the fabricated biosensor depends both on the mass transfer kinetics and the dimensions of the sensor. The response time of the biosensors can be improved by (a) improving the mass transfer kinetics by blocking the specific unreactive sites and (b) by reducing the dimensions of the device. Upon blocking unreactive sites, the possibility of the analyte reacting with the active surface is greater. In this work, we have focused on developing a flexible, stable, sensitive, and selective biosensor by reducing the dimension of the sensor to 2 cm × 2 cm. The response speed of the BioFET was obtained as 0.2 s, which is far superior to the recently reported biosensors, as shown in Table 2. The sensitivity of the FET was calculated by plotting a linear calibration curve between change in current vs. increase in the concentration of epinephrine hormone21 ranging from 5 nM–50 μM, as shown in Fig. 4(e). A maximum sensitivity of 115.2 nM−1 was obtained at a Vgs of (−20 V) due to the maximum base current change for higher concentrations like 25 nM–0.14 μM. For lower concentrations of epinephrine such as 0.5–25 nM, the sensitivity was obtained as 48.3 nM−1. The electric field is maximum at a maximum liquid gate potential, increasing the collection of charge carriers during the interaction of epinephrine hormone with the BiVO4 nanofibers.22 The linear calibration curve was obtained for n = 5 sensors. The detection limit was calculated using the formula LOD = 3S/m (where S-standard deviation of the response, m- sensitivity). A minimum LOD of 0.34 nM was obtained, which is superior compared to the recent reports. The FET-based biosensor demonstrates exceptional sensitivity and limit of detection, clearly stating the applicability of the fabricated FET for the detection of epinephrine in real-time human urine samples.

3.4. Interference studies & real-time detection of epinephrine in human urine samples
Interference studies of the fabricated FET were performed using the facile amperometric method, where the change in current is measured upon successive spiking of epinephrine hormones with the interfering analytes in real-time urine samples. The commonly occurring interfering species in urine samples are Na+ & K+ ions, DA, AA, serotonin, and UA. The liquid gate potential was fixed at −20 V, and the Vds was maintained as 1 V for performing amperometry studies. A prominent change in response was obtained upon interaction with 10 μM of epinephrine, and a negligible difference in current was obtained for a five-fold increase in the concentration of the interference species, as shown in Fig. 5(a). The fabricated BiVO4 nanofiber-based FET displayed excellent affinity towards epinephrine molecules resulting in excellent selectivity of the fabricated. This enhanced selectivity can be attributed to the selective binding between the catecholamines and ternary metal oxides. The fabricated BiVO4 sensor does not respond to AA and UA due to the absence of phenyl groups, resulting in weak electrostatic interactions. Despite the similar structures of epinephrine and serotonin, a minor change in current was obtained towards serotonin due to the absence of catechol structures responsible for the catalytic activity between BiVO4 nanofibers and epinephrine. Dopamine caused no change in current owing to the change in dimensions of the chain resulting in the reduced electrostatic interactions and electron transfer properties.23 The Bi–O and V–O complexes form temporary electrostatic binding with the epinephrine molecules resulting in efficient conductance. The real-time applicability of the biosensor was examined by detecting the unknown concentrations of epinephrine present in biological samples like human urine. The initial concentration of epinephrine was found to be zero in the taken urine samples, which was verified using clinical tests. The test matrix of the urine sample is detailed in Section 1 ESI.† An unknown concentration of epinephrine (E) was added to the urine samples (U), and a corresponding change in drain–source current was measured, as shown in Fig. 5(b). Further, the drain to source current was measured for known epinephrine concentrations, E1, E2, and E3 – 0.4, 0.8, and 1.2 nM, as per the standard addition method. The obtained responses were plotted with respect to the concentration, as shown in the inset of Fig. 5(b). The linear calibration curve is used to interpret the unknown concentration of epinephrine present in a human urine sample. In this case, the unknown concentration was obtained as 0.1 nM. The reliability of the fabricated BioFET was confirmed by clinically examining the test matrix.


Fig. 5 (a) Interference studies for successive addition of epinephrine and the other interfering analytes in human urine samples (b) detection of unknown epinephrine concentrations in urine samples inset: Standard addition approach graph.
3.5 Flexibility, stability & reproducibility studies
The recoverability studies of the fabricated FET are illustrated in Table 1. The biosensor-based FET demonstrated an excellent recoverability with a minimum relative SD of 3.30%. Further, the reusability and chemical stability of the BiVO4 coating on Cr/Ti metal of the BioFET was monitored by performing sensing studies for 30 days, as depicted in Fig. S1 (ESI†). The BioFET was washed in DI water after every use and stored at 4 °C. Ahead of every usage, the sensor was cleaned with buffer solution and incubated for 20 min before the epinephrine sensing. The FET-based biosensor displayed a negligible change in response for 30 days. The flexibility studies were performed to examine the response of the sensor upon the strain. The physical stability of the BiVO4 coating on Cr/Ti metal contacts can also be monitored using flexibility studies. To apply strain, minimal bending was applied to the FET manually, and a sensing response was taken once the sensor was brought back to the initial condition. The response of the FET for 200 bending cycles is depicted in Fig. S2 (ESI†). The fabricated FET displays excellent robustness with minimum change in response even after 200 bending cycles. The performance of the BioFET was also examined under strain and relaxed conditions. Under strain state, especially with a minimal strain up to 15°, the BioFET displayed a negligible change in response. However, the response decreased drastically with increased strain values, as shown in Fig. S3 (ESI†). This could be attributed to the change in gate capacitance due to the geometrical separation of nanofibers and the dispersion of liquid electrolytes with increase in strain values.24 The carrier mobility and sensitivity before and after annealing of contacts are discussed in ESI† Section S3.

Table 1 Determination of epinephrine/adrenaline in human urine samples
Sample name	Epinephrine spiked	Epinephrine recovered	Recovery (%)
E	—	—	—
U1 + E	0.4 nM	0.38 nM	95
U2 + E	0.8 nM	0.79 nM	98.7
U3 + E	1.2 nM	1.22 nM	101.6
Relative standard deviation (SD) (%)	—	—	3.30%
BiVO4 nanofibers-based BioFET was compared with the recently reported label-free, low dimensional active material-based epinephrine sensors as given in Table 2. It is noteworthy to mention that this is the first report employing a FET platform to detect epinephrine hormone. Recently, metal oxides like ZnO,25 Bi2O3,26 and NiO31 have been used as potential materials for the detection of epinephrine. Also, ternary oxides like Ni6MnO829 have also been employed as electroactive sensing materials. However, these metal oxides are modified with low dimensional materials like MWCNTs,25 Graphene, ferrocene, etc.,30 to increase the surface area of the active sensing material. Further, in another study36 the active sensing material was functionalized with metal nanoparticles like Mo, Au, and Pd to enhance the sensitivity of the fabricated biosensor. The fabrication of composites employs multiple processing techniques and involves sophisticated methodology. In addition, some of the electrodes have serious drawbacks like cross-sensitivity and electrode fouling. However, the current work is focused on developing a cost-effective, flexible, and facile fabrication technique based on BiVO4-FET to detect epinephrine in a wide sensing range of 5 nM–50 μM, with excellent sensitivity and selectivity towards epinephrine. Further, the fabricated FET demonstrated excellent stability and reusability for 1 month. The estimated cost of the cleanroom-free BioFET is ∼$3 (detailed in Section S2, ESI†), making it highly affordable for point-of-care diagnostics in healthcare applications. The strategy employed here paves a new path for developing cost-effective, label-free detection of various biomolecules using ternary oxides.

Table 2 Comparison of the BiVO4-FET with the recently reported label-free, low dimensional active material-based epinephrine sensors
Material	Synthesis approach	Sensing technique	Linear Sensing Range (μM)	LOD (nM)	Sensitivity (μA nM−1)	Response time (s)	Flexibility	Ref.
ZnO/MWCNTs	Hydrothermal + ultrasonication	DPV	0.4–2.4	16	0.524	—	No	25
Bi2O3@rGO + ultrasonication	Hummers’ method	DPV	0.01–550.25	2.14	5.4555	—	No	26
g-C3N4/NCDS	Thermal polycondensation + hydrothermal	DPV	0.0001–0.001	0.003	0.0598	—	No	27
Graphene nanoribbons	Polymerization	DPV	6.4–100	2160	26.2	—	No	28
Ni6MnO8@C nanosheets	Hydrothermal	DPV	0.01–800	33.3	0.107		No	29
Zno-Ferrocene/Graphene	Hydrothermal+ ultrasonication	DPV	20–100	93	2.69	—	No	30
Pt doped NiO/MWCNTs	Sol–gel	DPV	0.5–300	35	1.139	—	No	31
g-C3N4/PANI/CdO	Electrodeposition	EIS	0.05–80	11	0.0401	—	No	32
Poly (Valine)	Electrochemical polymerization	EIS	5–60	290	1.938	—	No	33
Chitosan-fCNT	Electrochemical	CV	0–10	30	—	—	No	34
Ni-CNT	Sonochemical	Amperometry	0.6–4.3	28	8.31	5	No	35
BiVO4nanofibers	Electrospinning	FET	0.025 –50	0.34	115.2	0.2	Yes	This work
4. Conclusion
In this work, we report for the first time, a BiVO4 based BioFET for sensitive and selective detection of epinephrine in human urine samples. Structural and morphological characterization revealed the formation of monoclinic-scheelite phase, ultrathin BiVO4 nanofibers. Electrical characterization revealed excellent transfer characteristics of the fabricated FET with an n-type behaviour. Superior sensitivity of 115.2 nM−1 was obtained over a broad sensing range of 25 nm–50 μM with a LOD of 0.34 nM. The sensing mechanism is attributed to the electrostatic gating effect and the Schottky barrier effect occurring during the interaction of epinephrine molecules with the liquid gated BioFET. Also, the BioFET demonstrated a rapid response at a minimum time of 0.2 s. The real-time applicability of the sensor was validated using interference studies and by detecting the unknown concentration of epinephrine in the biological sample. The fabricated BioFET has been used for selective and sensitive detection of epinephrine hormones in urine samples. A similar strategy can be explored for the detection of a wide range of analytes in biological fluids. Our future work will be focused on improving the sensitivity of the BioFET by modifying the active surface with monolayer/multilayer electroactive species like metal nanoparticles. This strategy opens new avenues in the field of cost-effective, point-of-care diagnostic systems for detecting complex macro-biomolecules.
S-1
Supporting Information
BiVO4 Nanofiber-Based Field-Effect Transistors for Detection of
Epinephrine/Adrenaline Hormones
Sushmitha Veeralingam#1
, Sushmee Badhulika1*
1Department of Electrical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Hyderabad
Hyderabad, 502285, India
*Corresponding author: E-mail: sbadh@iith.ac.in; Telephone: 040-23018443 Fax
04023016032
S1. Preparation of real time urine samples and Epinephrine samples
Phosphate buffer solution (pH 7.2) was prepared by mixing 6.844 mM of NaCl, 1.34 mM of
KCl, 0.507 mM of Na2HPO4 and 8.81 mM of KH2PO4 in 0.2 mL of DI water. Urine samples
were collected from a 24-year adult. 2 mL of the urine sample was taken and diluted with 10-
fold-0.1 M PBS of pH -7.2 and used for real time sensing applications. Various concentrations
of epinephrine samples were prepared in phosphate buffer solution for sensing studies and for
real time analysis.
0 5 10 15 20 25 30
0.10
0.15
0.20
R/R
0
No. of Days
Figure S1. Stability and reusability test of FET biosensor for 30 days.
Electronic Supplementary Material (ESI) for Materials Chemistry Frontiers.
This journal is © the Partner Organisations 2021
S-2
0 50 100 150 200
0.10
0.15
0.20
R/R
0
Bending cycles
Figure S2. Flexibility studies of FET biosensor for over 200 cycles.
Relaxed state strained state (=15%) strained state (>15%) Relaxed state -0.5
0.0
0.5
R/R
Figure S3. The normalised response of the sensor under relaxed state and strained conditions
Section S2. Total cost of the device
1. Cost of Aluminium foil substrate – $ 0.014
S-3
2. Cost of Cr/Ti - $ 1.80
3. Cost of chemicals used per device -
Bismuth nitrate pentahydrate, Ammonium metavanadate, Citric acid, Polyvinylpyrrolidone –
$ 1.12
Product cost per device – cost of substrate + cost of chemicals used = $ 3.00.
Section S3. Effect of Annealing treatment of contacts
The contacts were annealed at 50C for 5 min. As a result, the carrier mobility increased from
3.24 cm2 V-1s
-1 to 5.23 cm2 V-1s
-1
. An increase in carrier mobility of 61% was achieved. It
should also be noted that the carrier mobility decreased drastically at temperatures above 50C,
which can be attributed to the reduction in current flowing through the channel. Further, the
sensitivity increased from 86.32 nM-1 to 115.2 nM-1 in the sensing range of 25 nM – 50 µM,
upon annealing of the contacts. This increase in sensitivity can be attributed to the removal of
surface oxides in the contact area.

