We use essential cookies to make sure the site can function. We also use optional cookies for advertising, personalisation of content, usage analysis, and social media.

By accepting optional cookies, you consent to the processing of your personal data - including transfers to third parties. Some third parties are outside of the European Economic Area, with varying standards of data protection.

See ourprivacy policyfor more information on the use of your personal data.

Manage preferencesfor further information and to change your choices.

Advertisement

Access provided by Argonne Research Library

410Accesses

1Citation

Explore all metrics

Ultrathin molecularly imprinted polymer (MIP) films were deposited on the surfaces of ZnO nanorods (ZNRs) and nanosheets (ZNSs) by electropolymerization to afford extended-gate field-effect transistor sensors for detecting phenytoin (PHT) in plasma. Molecular imprinting efficiency was optimized by controlling the contents of functional monomers and the template in the precursor solution. PHT sensing was performed in plasma solutions with various concentrations by monitoring the drain current as a function of drain voltage under an applied gate voltage of 1.5 V. The reliability and reproducibility of the fabricated sensors were evaluated through a solution treatment process for complete PHT removal and PHT adsorption-removal cycling, while selectivity was examined by analyzing responses to chemicals with structures analogous to that of PHT. Compared with the ZNS/extracted-MIP sensor and sensors with non-imprinted polymer (NIP) films, the ZNR/extracted-MIP sensor showed superior responses to PHT-containing plasma due to selective PHT adsorption, achieving an imprinting factor of 4.23, detection limit of 12.9 ng/mL, quantitation limit of 53.0 ng/mL, and selectivity coefficients of 3–4 (against tramadol) and ~ 5 (against diphenhydramine). Therefore, we believe that the MIP-based ZNR sensing platform is promising for the practical detection of PHT and other drugs and evaluation of their proper dosages.

Avoid common mistakes on your manuscript.

Epilepsy is a chronic neurological disease that is characterized by a persistent predisposition to seizures and leads to numerous neurobiological, cognitive, and psychosocial consequences [1]. Currently, long-term treatment with antiepileptics fails to induce seizure remission in > 30% of patients but may increase the likelihood of cardiovascular diseases [2,3]. Phenytoin (PHT), a common antiseizure drug widely used in clinical practice, exerts antiepileptic effects by stabilizing the function of brain cell membranes and increasing the levels of inhibitory neurotransmitters (serotonin and γ-aminobutyric acid) in the brain [4,5]. Generally, the concentration of antiepileptics in plasma is maintained within the range of 10–20 μg/mL to minimize toxic effects and achieve sufficient seizure control; therefore, it should be closely monitored to control the therapeutic regimen and optimize the clinical outcome.

To date, antiepileptics have been analyzed using solid-phase [6,7], liquid–liquid [8], and stir-bar sorptive [9] extractions in combination with chromatographic methods. Given that conventional solid-phase extraction relies on generic properties such as hydrophobicity and is therefore of limited use, molecularly imprinted polymers (MIPs) have been employed to realize selective PHT extraction [10,11,12]. Typically, molecular imprinting based on the polymerization of functional monomers around a template molecule in the presence of a cross-linker followed by template removal provides polymeric materials with binding pockets capable of selectively binding and recognizing target analytes. In addition to their use in extraction systems, MIPs are employed as recognition units in chemosensors to increase their sensitivity and selectivity [13,14]. Various analytical methods using optical, electrochemical, and piezoelectric signal transducers can be used to determine the amount of analyte adsorbed on MIP sensing platforms [15,16,17,18].

Field-effect transistor (FET)-based chemo- and biosensors have been used extensively to achieve ultrasensitive electronic detection, miniaturization, and low-cost manufacturing [19,20,21,22]. Additionally, graphene electrochemical transistor sensors (GECTs) have been explored for chemical sensing applications, due to their intrinsic amplification effect and chemical stability [23,24,25]. Extended-gate FET (EG-FET) sensors are one of the first miniaturized chemosensors applied in medicine, food and biological process analyses, and environmental monitoring [26,27]. MIP-based EG-FET sensors employ two types of commercially available FETs, namely junction-type FETs (JFETs) and metal–oxide–semiconductor FETs (MOSFETs), to collect electrical signals caused by selective analyte detection and feature an extended-gate surface that can be easily (electro)chemically modified via molecular imprinting. JFET-based sensors show relatively rapid concentration-dependent responses to potential changes at the extended-gate surface and are therefore well suited for the direct characterization and detection of small biomolecules such as oligosaccharides and histamines [28,29,30]. However, in the case of MOSFETs, the transistor characteristics are determined at a constant gate voltage vs. the reference electrode, while the drain voltage is scanned within a specific potential range [31]. In such systems, the extended-gate surface is preferentially coated by conducting MIP films owing to their electrical conductivity and redox properties [31]. Iskierko et al. studied the ability of EG-FET chemosensors with MIP films generated by the electropolymerization of thiophene derivatives to selectively sense and quantify enantiomers, biomarkers, and proteins, among others [32,33,34,35], revealing that these platforms hold great promise for achieving miniaturization, ease of handling, high sensitivity, and low cost. In addition, they investigated the use of increased-surface-area MIP films as recognition units for protein detection and employed a sacrificial metal–organic framework to facilitate the access of proteins to recognition sites [34]. However, the design of structured recognition units to increase the surface area of MIP films for the development of enhanced and efficient sensing platforms remains challenging. To address this challenge, we herein developed EG-FET chemosensors featuring two morphologically different high-surface-area ZnO patterns electrochemically grown on Au-coated quartz crystal (QC) electrodes. A PHT-imprinted polymer matrix (MIP film) was prepared on these patterns using the cyclic voltammetry (CV)-induced coelectropolymerization of catechol (CAT) and 3,4-dihydroxybenzaldehyde (3,4-DHBA), and the monomer composition was optimized to achieve highly sensitive detection. In the resulting sensors, the PHT-imprinted polymer matrix acted as the recognition unit, while the EG-FET acted as the signal transduction unit. Additionally, a non-imprinted polymer (NIP)-based chemosensor was prepared, and the sensitivities and selectivities of the four sensors (two MIP-based chemosensors + two corresponding NIP-based chemosensors) in PHT-containing plasma solutions were evaluated and compared.

ZnCl2reagent grade (≥ 98% purity) was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich Co. (MO, USA), while KCl (extra pure, 99%) was purchased from Duksan Pure Chemicals Co. (Ansan, South Korea). CAT (GC, > 99%) and 3,4-DHBA (GC, > 98%) were purchased from Tokyo Chemical Industry Co. (Tokyo, Japan). PHT (> 99%), Na2HPO4·2H2O (extra pure, > 98%), and NaH2PO4·2H2O (99%) were obtained from Acros Organics (Geel, Belgium). Tramadol hydrochloride (TRA, HPCL grade, ≥ 99%) and diphenhydramine hydrochloride (DPD, HPCL grade, ≥ 98%) were obtained from Sigma-Aldrich Co. (MO, USA). Artificial plasma fluid (BZ273, pH 7.4, ≥ 99.9%) was supplied by Biochemazone (Alberta, Canada). The major compositions of the plasma are ion (Na+, K+, Mg2+, Ca+, Cl−, HCO3−, HPO42−, SO42−), amino acids, and proteins (serum albumin). The plasma was diluted tenfold with sodium phosphate buffer (Na-PB, 0.1 M, pH 7.0) before use. K4[Fe(CN)6] (≥ 99.95%) was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich Co. (MO, USA). All chemicals were used without further purification.

ZnO nanostructures were electrodeposited using a typical three-electrode cell interfaced with a potentiostat (Keithley 2450-EC, Tektronix Inc. OR., USA). A 9-MHz Au-coated AT-cut QC (QA-A9M AU[M], Seiko EG&G, Seiko Instruments, Inc., Tokyo, Japan) chip (5 mm in diameter) was used as the working electrode. The QC chip consists of Au top-layer and Ti under-layer, and the thickness of Au and Ti layer is 300 nm and 100 nm, respectively. Pt wire and Ag/AgCl were used as counter and reference electrodes, respectively. After connecting the QC chip mounted on the dip-type cell, Pt wire, and Ag/AgCl to the Keithley 2450-EC, electrodeposition was performed at 80 °C in an oil bath under 150 rpm stirring using a precursor solution prepared by dissolving ZnCl2and KCl in deionized (DI) water (80 mL) to concentrations of 5 mM and 0.1 M, respectively. ZnO nanorod (ZNR) films were electrodeposited on the QC electrode through chronoamperometry at a constant applied voltage (− 1.0 V, 15 min), while ZnO nanosheet (ZNS) films were prepared by sequential chronopotentiometry (− 0.15 mA, 45 min) and chronoamperometry (− 2.0 V, 5 min). Both ZnO films were rinsed with DI water and dried with N2gas.

MIP films were electrodeposited on QC electrodes with ZnO nanostructures (ZNR and ZNS) by CV at applied voltages from − 0.2 to 0.8 V and a scan rate of 10 mV/s over three scans using Parstat 4000 potentiostat (Princeton Applied Research, TN., USA) based on a three-electrode cell. The monomer and template concentrations in the MIP precursor solution (sodium phosphate buffer (Na-PB; 20 mL, 0.1 M, pH 7.0) containing PHT, CAT, and 3,4-DHBA) were optimized to maximize molecular imprinting efficiency (TablesS1andS2). After their formation, the MIP films were rinsed with DI water and immersed into a 1:1 (v/v) mixture of methanol and DI water for 30 min to remove the imprinted PHT template and then rinsed several times with DI water and dried with N2gas to afford extracted-MIP (E-MIP) films. NIP films were fabricated using the same procedure but without the PHT template.

The surface morphologies of the ZnO patterns, MIP films, and E-MIP films were investigated using field-emission scanning electron microscopy (FE-SEM; Hitachi SU8220, Tokyo, Japan) at an accelerating voltage of 5 kV. All samples were coated with a thin Pt layer to obtain high-quality images. A Fourier transform infrared (FT-IR) spectrometer (Frontier, PerkinElmer, MA, USA) with an attenuated total reflectance (ATR) mode was used to investigate the chemical characterizations of ZnO patterns, MIP, E-MIP, and NIP films. The crystallographic features of the two ZnO patterns were probed using X-ray diffraction (XRD; Empyrean, Panalytical, Almelo, Netherlands) with CuKαradiation (λ= 1.54059 Å) in the 2θrange of 20–100° and step-scan mode (step size = 0.04°). ZnO/MIP film morphology was probed by transmission electron microscopy (TEM; Hitachi HT-7700, Tokyo, Japan). For these measurements, the film was scraped off from the QC electrode and dispersed in ethanol. Aliquots of the resulting dispersion were placed on carbon-coated TEM grids (CF200-Cu, Electron Microscopy Sciences, Washington, USA), dried for a day, and imaged at an accelerating voltage of 100 kV. The removal of the imprinted PHT template from both films was confirmed by electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) measurements performed in a three-electrode cell (film = working electrode, Pt wire = counter electrode, Ag/AgCl = reference electrode). A DC potential of 0.2 V was applied at an amplitude of 10 mV in the frequency range of 100 kHz to 0.1 Hz in Na-PB (10 mL, 0.1 M, pH 7.0) containing 10 mM K4[Fe(CN)6] (redox ion probe), and charge transfer resistance (Rct) was calculated by simulating the obtained plots using the R(Q(RW)) circuit in ZSimpWin software (Ametek, USA).

Sensor responses were recorded using a Keithley 4200 A-SCS parameter analyzer (Tektronix Inc., OR, USA) and a commercialn-MOSFET in enhancement mode (CD4007UB, Texas Instruments, TX, USA) connected to an extended gate (ZnO/MIP film on QC electrodes). Film-coated QC electrodes were mounted on a well-type QC microbalance cell and connected to the N channel gate. After the cell was charged with Na-PB (0.1 M, pH 7.0), the reference electrode was immersed into the solution at a distance of 5 mm from the working electrode. The drain currents (Ids) of films at each preparation step (including PHT sensing) were collected at an applied gate voltage of 1.5 V to establish optimal conditions associated with high imprinting efficiency. The sensing performances of MIP films were examined by determining the drain current change (ΔIds) of the EG-FET in PHT-containing plasma solution diluted tenfold with Na-PB (0.1 M, pH 7.0). Sensitivity, binding kinetics, and selectivity were evaluated in diluted plasma solution at PHT concentrations of 10–200 ng/mL. For sensitivity determination,Idswas monitored under the abovementioned conditions after 30-min immersion into the PHT solution. For selectivity determination,Idswas recorded after 30-min incubation in diluted plasma solutions containing one analyte (PHT, TRA, or DPD @ 10–200 ng/mL) or all analytes (total analyte concentration = 30–600 ng/mL). Selectivity was further assessed by conducting measurements after 30-min immersion into a plasma solution containing both TRA and DPD (total analyte concentration = 20–400 ng/mL). ΔIdswas measured after adding PHT (10–200 ng/mL) to an analogous solution followed by 30-min immersion for PHT adsorption. In this case, the total concentration was 30–600 ng/mL, and the PHT:TRA:DPD mass ratio equaled 1:1:1.

The formation of vertically aligned ZNRs on the QC electrode increased the surface area of the electropolymerized MIP film (analyte recognition unit) and enabled efficient signal collection on the drain part of the EG-FET sensing transducer as ann-type oxide semiconductor. Figure1a illustrates the steps involved in sensor fabrication. ZNRs and flower-like ZNSs were electrodeposited on QC electrodes under the chosen conditions to achieve controlled surface morphology and conductivity. Various parameters such as applied voltage, electrolyte concentration, and deposition time can be adjusted to optimize the diameter, density, and length of ZNRs. As shown in Fig.S1, the growth of ZNRs was observed corresponding to the deposition time under controlled applied voltage of − 1.0 V and zinc concentration of 5 mM [36]. Depending on the deposition time, ZNRs were observed to gradually grow and become densely packed, resulting in optimal density at 15 min. As shown in Fig.1b, hexagonally structured ZNRs exhibited highly oriented growth in the direction perpendicular to the QC electrode and had a length of 190–267 nm and a diameter of 66–95 nm (aspect ratio = 2.8–2.9); in contrast, ZNSs featured a two-dimensional structure with random flake-like grains. In view of their morphological features, both ZnO nanostructures provided an increased surface area for template imprinting. The electroactive surface areas for bare QC, ZnR, and ZnO electrodes, determined using the de Randles–Sevcik equation, are denoted as 0.1933, 0.3125, and 0.2502 cm2, respectively (Fig.S2). Figure1c presents the XRD patterns of the electrodeposited ZnO nanostructures. The high-intensity peaks of ZNRs at 34.46° and 62.74° corresponded to the (002) and (103) planes, respectively, and matched the hexagonal ZnO (wurtzite) structure. The high intensity of the (002) peak indicated the presence of well-shapedc-axis-oriented hexagonal columns [37]. The XRD pattern of ZNSs well matched the standard diffraction pattern of wurtzite, featuring peaks at 31.74°, 34.46°, 36.18°, 47.46°, 56.46°, 62.90°, and 67.82° due to diffraction from the (100), (002), (101), (102), (110), (103), and (112) crystal planes, respectively (JCPDS No. 36–1451), and indicating a polycrystalline wurtzite structure [38,39].

aSchematic of electropolymerization-based PHT imprinting on QC electrodes with ZNRs.bTop-view and cross-sectional SEM images of ZNRs and ZNSs (scale bar = 1 μm).cXRD patterns of electrodeposited ZNRs and ZNSs.dCV curves recorded for different monomer compositions (TableS1) in 0.1 M Na-PB (pH 7.0) used to fabricate ZNR/MIP films (only the first cycle is shown).eTEM images of ZNR/MIP film obtained under optimal conditions (scan rate = 10 mV/s, number of cycles = 3, precursor solution = 0.1 M Na-PB (pH 7.0) containing 3 mM CAT, 3 mM 3,4-DHBA, and 0.25 mM PHT.fSchematic of EG-FET chemosensor featuring a ZNR/MIP film-coated QC electrode connected to the MOSFET gate.gDrain current (Ids)–drain voltage (Vds) plots recorded for bare Au and ZNR/MIP electrodes as well as for ZNR/E-MIP after PHT extraction and after 30-min PHT sensing in 0.1 M Na-PB (pH 7.0) containing 10 μg/mL PHT.hDrain current change (ΔIds) on six ZNR/E-MIP electrodes after PHT sensing (30 min) in 0.1 M Na-PB (pH 7.0) containing 10 μg/mL PHT. The six E-MIP films were prepared by extracting PHT from ZNR/MIP films fabricated using monomer and template concentrations listed in TableS1

CAT serves as the backbone monomer, while 3,4-DHBA acts as the functional monomer capable of hydrogen bonding with PHT. The ratio between these two components in the polymer matrix is crucial for efficient PHT imprinting. Hence, the concentration dependence of CAT and 3,4-DHBA was investigated for optimizing the composition of the polymer matrix at a fixed PHT concentration of 0.25 mM. According to the literature, the oxidation peak of 3,4-DHBA on a bare gold electrode occurs at 0.83 V [40]. However, a weak oxidation peak attributed to the Na-PB (pH 7.0) was observed at 0.85 V. To minimize buffer effect, cyclic voltammetry (CV) was conducted within the applied voltage range of − 0.2 to 0.8 V. Due to its non-electroactive nature, PHT was not considered when setting up the electrochemical conditions. The first CV curves recorded for the monomer compositions listed in TableS1(MIP1–6) featured two current values at 0.65 and 0.80 V corresponding to the formation of CAT and 3,4-DHBA radicals (Fig.1d), which underwent coupling to result in MIP film deposition on the ZnO surface [40,41,42]. A decrease in the oxidation peak at 0.65 V was observed with decreasing CAT concentration from 5 to 0 mM (MIP1 to MIP6), while the current value at 0.8 V increases with the concentration of 3,4-DHBA, rising from 1 to 6 mM. TEM imaging (Fig.1e) showed that an approximately 10-nm-thick MIP film was electrodeposited on the entire ZNR surface after three CV cycles.

Figure1f illustrates the structure of the prepared EG-FET sensor. When a positive voltage with respect to the source of then-type MOSFET channel was applied to the gate, the electrons (majority carriers in the substrate) were attracted to the surface of the gate and formed a conducting channel between the source and drain. Accordingly, the transistor characteristics were determined at a constant gate voltage vs. the Pt reference electrode (Vg= 1.50 V), while the drain voltage (Vds) was scanned from 0 to 1.0 V. The change inIdswas monitored for all MIP-based EG-FET sensors after 30-min incubation in 0.1 M Na-PB (pH 7.0) containing 0.25 mM PHT (Figs.1g andS3). Furthermore, similar monitoring was performed in 0.1 M Na-PB (pH 7.0) for each step used to prepare E-MIP films on ZnO arrays. Comparison of these two configurations (i.e., E-MIP and sensing on Fig.1g) determines the detectable window. A highIds(23 μA) was observed for the bare Au QC electrode owing to its high conductivity. The deposition of MIP films generated a distinct change inIds. In the case of the ZNR/MIP3 electrode (Fig.1g),Idsabruptly decreased as the large amount of imprinted insulating PHT molecules in the matrix hindered current flow at the extended gate. In the case of all E-MIP films,Idsdecreased with increasing amount of 3,4-DHBA used for MIP film formation. Thus, the monomer ratio in the electropolymerized random copolymer matrix with imprinted PHT molecules significantly affectedIds, with the largest difference inIdsbetween MIP and E-MIP electrodes observed at a CAT:3,4-DHBA molar ratio of 1:1 (MIP-3, Fig.1g). This result implied that MIP3 was best suited for PHT recognition. For all E-MIP films,Idsdecreased upon PHT sensing but completely recovered to the value of the original MIP films, which indicated effective PHT recognition in accordance with the produced imprinted cavities. Among the tested ZNR/E-MIP electrodes, ZNR/E-MIP3 presented the largest ΔIdsof ~ 10.3 μA upon PHT sensing, thus featuring the widest detection window (Fig.1h). To further optimize imprinting conditions based on the composition (CAT:3,4-DHBA = 1:1, mol/mol) of the E-MIP3 film, we adjusted the amount of the PHT template to make as many cavities as possible in the MIP matrix (TableS2), revealing that molecular imprinting efficiency depended on the number of imprinted cavities, i.e., on the amount of PHT (Fig.S4). Within the examined ranges, the widest detection window (ΔIds) was obtained at a PHT concentration of 0.25 mM. Thus, a sufficiently amplifiedIdssignal could be monitored using the ZNR/MIP3-3 electrode, which exhibited high sensitivity to PHT and a high imprinting factor (IF; ΔIds,MIP/ΔIds,NIP≈ 5.2).

The optimized electropolymerization conditions were used to fabricate MIP-based EG-FET chemosensors, i.e., those with ZnO/MIP3-3 electrodes. SEM imaging (Fig.2a, b) showed no significant differences in surface morphology between the ZnO and ZnO/MIP electrodes because of the ultralow thickness of the MIP film produced via only three CV cycles. Similarly, no significant morphological differences were observed after PHT removal (Fig.S5). The formed poly(CAT-co-3,4-DHBA) films were characterized by FT-IR spectra (Fig.S6).

Top-view (upper) and cross-sectional (lower) SEM images ofaZNR/MIP andbZNS/MIP electrodes. Insets represent high-resolution images. All scale bars equal 1 μm.cEIS responses of bare Au and ZNR electrodes as well as those of ZNR/MIP electrodes before and after specific extraction times (10–40 min) measured in Na-PB solution (0.1 M, pH 7.0) containing 10 mM K4[Fe(CN)6].dΔIdsof ZNR/MIP film during repeated PHT adsorption (30 min in tenfold diluted plasma solution containing 1 μg/mL PHT) and desorption (1 h 30 min in a 1:1 (v/v) mixture of methanol and DI water)

To confirm template removal from the imprinted matrix, we performed EIS measurements at different template extraction times and then evaluated impedimetric changes at the surface interfaces due to the formation of PHT-detecting cavities. The ZnO/MIP electrodes were incubated in the extraction solution, and Nyquist plots were recorded after 10, 20, 30, and 40 min to determineRct. As shown in Figs.2c andS7, these plots contained a high-frequency semicircular portion and a low-frequency linear portion. The semicircles were fitted using the R(Q(RW)) equivalent circuit model (Fig.2c, inset), whereRsdenotes the solution resistance,Zwis the Warburg impedance, andQis the constant phase element. TheRctvalues of the produced MIPs were almost the same as those of pure ZNRs and ZNSs. However, with increasing extraction time,Rctdecreased to 1171 Ω (ZNR/MIP) or 4204 Ω (ZNS/MIP) because of the removal of the insulating template from the MIP matrix. At ≥ 30 min,Rctstopped changing, which was indicative of complete PHT removal. Moreover, the validity of the PHT extraction process was confirmed by monitoring the change inIdsas a function of extraction time in EG-FET systems (Fig.S8). In all cases,Idsincreased upon PHT extraction and stopped changing after 25 min, which indicated that complete template removal was achieved at this timepoint. Sensor reusability was evaluated by measuring ΔIdsfor the ZNR/MIP electrode over five sequential PHT sensing-removal cycles (Fig.2d). During cycling, ΔIdsstayed constant at − 11 ± 0.3 μA, which was indicative of high sensor stability and reproducibility. The recoveries, defined as ΔIdsfor PHT adsorption / ΔIdsfor PHT removal, are in the acceptable range from 96 to 101%, with relative standard deviation (RSD) values of 1.91% and bias values ranging from − 2.3 to 2.5%. These results indicate excellent precision and accuracy in aspect of reusability and sustainable repeatability and robustness in the operational conditions. Furthermore, the short-term stability of ZNR/MIP electrode was investigated by measuring − ΔIdsafter PHT adsorption once every 2 days. As shown in Fig.S9, the electrode showed the highly constant ΔIdsvalues within − 10.9 ± 0.1 μA with RSD ranging from 1.2 to 3.2 during at least 7 days.

The kinetics of PHT adsorption on ZNS/E-MIP and ZNR/E-MIP electrodes was evaluated in plasma solutions containing 10, 100, and 500 ng/mL PHT. Fig.S10shows that upon 30-min exposure to PHT, theIdsof the ZnO/E-MIP electrodes decreased. The extent of this decrease increased with increasing PHT concentration and (at a given PHT concentration) was higher for ZNR/E-MIP than for ZNS/E-MIP. Figure3a shows that for the ZNR/E-MIP electrode, the absolute value of ΔIdslinearly increased over 25 min at all PHT concentrations, with saturation observed at ≥ 100 ng/mL PHT. In contrast, a much lower increase in |ΔIds| was observed for the ZNS/E-MIP electrode (Fig.3b) because of the low sensing response of its recognition unit due to inefficient cavity formation during molecular imprinting on the ZNS structure.

ΔIdsofaZNR/E-MIP andbZNS/E-MIP electrodes as a function of adsorption time. Measurements were performed under an applied gate voltage of 1.5 V at a constant adsorption time interval (5 min) in tenfold diluted plasma solutions containing 10, 100, or 500 ng/mL PHT. ΔIdsofcZnO/E-MIP anddZnO/E-NIP films as a function of PHT concentration and corresponding linear fits. Measurements were performed after 30-min adsorption in tenfold diluted plasma solutions containing 10–200 ng/mL PHT

Furthermore, theIdsof ZNR and ZNS E-MIP/E-NIP pairs was measured in plasma solutions with 10–200 ng/mL PHT to investigate the concentration dependence of PHT adsorption. TheIdsof the ZNR/E-MIP electrode during 30-min exposure to 200 ng/mL PHT dropped to a value close to that originally observed for the PHT-imprinted film (Fig.S11), which indicated that PHT fully occupied the recognition cavities. The ZNS/E-MIP electrode demonstrated similar sensing behavior but a lower response because of the narrow detection range. In contrast, both NIP-based EG-FET sensors showed only small changes inIdsover the entire PHT concentration range because of the nonspecific adsorption of this analyte. As shown in Fig.3c, the EG-FET sensor with the ZNR/E-MIP electrode demonstrated a higher sensitivity of –0.033 μA/(ng/mL) with correlation coefficient (R2) = 0.996 compared to that of the ZNS/E-MIP electrode, which showed a sensitivity of –0.018 μA/(ng/mL) withR2= 0.941. For both ZnO/E-NIP films, |ΔIds| showed a negligible increase over the examined concentration range (Fig.3d). Based on the slopes of the ΔIds– PHT concentration curves, IFs of 4.23 and 4.29 were calculated for ZNR/E-MIP and ZNS/E-MIP electrodes, respectively. These values were similar, as the same number of imprinted cavities was formed by electropolymerization in the solution with the same monomer composition. However, a distinct amplification of the sensing signal on the electrical transducer was observed when the ZNR/E-MIP electrode was used for PHT sensing. Moreover, when both ZnO/E-MIP electrodes were used to sense PHT at higher concentrations (> 200 ng/mL), ΔIdsreached saturation because of the limited adsorption capacity of the MIP films (Fig.S12). The linear fits in Fig.3c were used to calculate the limit of detection (LOD) and the limit of quantitation (LOQ) ask×S/m, whereSis the standard deviation of they-intercept andmis the sensitivity (i.e., the slope of the calibration curve withkequal to the signal-to-noise ratio (k= 3 for LOD and 10 for LOQ)) [43]. The PHT LODs and LOQs were estimated as 12.9 and 53.0 ng/mL for ZNR/E-MIP, respectively, and as 43.1 and 176.7 ng/mL for ZNS/E-MIP, respectively. Compared to other recently reported PHT sensors, including those described by our group, the ZNR/E-MIP sensor showed excellent performance (i.e., LOD, LOQ, and IF) (Table1).

To evaluate the selectivity of the ZNR/E-MIP sensor, we recordedIdsafter 30-min exposure to a plasma solution containing 10–200 ng/mL of TRA or DPD (Fig.4a, b). In both cases,Idsdecreased with increasing concentration, which was ascribed to nonspecific adsorption. Figure4c shows ΔIdsas a function of analyte concentration, showing that in the case of TRA and DPD, a gentle linear decrease in ΔIdswith increasing concentration was observed. This behavior suggested the within the examined concentration range, the analytes nonspecifically bound to the imprinted surface through weak interactions with the MIP matrix. The slopes of the linear fits obtained for TRA and DPD were lower than the slope obtained for PHT (Fig.3c and dashed line in Fig.4c). When the ZNR/E-MIP sensor was incubated (30 min) in plasma solution containing all three analytes in a 1:1:1 weight ratio (Fig.S13), a pronounced decrease inIdswas observed with increasing total analyte concentration. The signal change due to PHT adsorption (Fig.4c) was almost identical to that in the PHT solution, as expected for the selective adsorption of PHT on the imprinted cavities owing to their strong adsorption affinity.

Ids–Vdscurves of the ZNR/E-MIP electrode measured after 30-min incubation in tenfold diluted plasma solution containing 10–200 ng/mL ofaTRA orbDPD.cExpected interactions of the ZNR/E-MIP electrode with TRA and DPD.dΔIdsof ZNR/MIP electrode as a function of TRA and DPD concentrations and corresponding linear fits. The calibration curve obtained for PHT (Fig.3c) is presented by a dashed line as a reference. Sensing in a solution containing PHT, TRA, and DPD was performed at a PHT:TRA:DPD mass ratio of 1:1:1

For the ZNS/E-MIP electrode, selectivity against other chemicals was investigated following the same procedure (Figs.5a andS14) and was lower than that of the ZNR/E-MIP electrode over the entire PHT concentration range. Moreover, when the NIP films were electrodeposited on ZNR and ZNS surfaces, no significant change in ΔIdswas observed for the detection of all analytes (Figs.5b,S15, andS16). These results indicate that NIP films without any imprinted cavities nonspecifically adsorbed limited amounts of each analyte with no significant selectivity for PHT. The selectivity coefficient (α) of PHT on the ZNR/E-MIP electrode (i.e., the ratio between the ΔIdsof PHT and that of other chemicals) equaled 3–4 against TRA and ~ 5 against DPD within the concentration range of 50–200 ng/mL except for the lowest concentration of 10 ng/mL (Fig.S17a). Under the same conditions, the ZNR/E-NIP electrode exhibited poor selectivity (α= 1) regardless of the analyte structure. In contrast, no significant difference in selectivity against TRA was observed between the ZNS/E-MIP and ZNS/E-NIP electrodes (α≈ 1.5) (Fig.S17b). Notably, the ZNS/E-MIP electrode had a relatively high selectivity for DPD (α= 3–4) owing to the structure of this analyte.

ΔIdsas a function of analyte concentration (and corresponding linear fits) measured foraZNS/E-MIP andbZNR/E-NIP electrodes after 30-min incubation in tenfold diluted plasma solution containing individual analytes at concentrations of 10–200 ng/mL. The calibration curve of PHT is represented by a dashed line as a reference. For sensing in a solution containing all three analytes, the PHT:TRA:DPD mass ratio equaled 1:1:1.c, dΔIdsas a function of individual analyte concentration and the corresponding linear fits obtained forcZNR/E-MIP anddZNS/E-NIP electrodes after 30-min incubation in tenfold diluted plasma solution containing two analogous analytes (step 1). Sensing in a solution containing TRA and DPD was performed at a TRA:DPD mass ratio of 1:1 and a total analyte concentration of 20–400 ng/mL. After measurements in step 1, PHT was added to the tenfold diluted plasma solution at concentrations of 10–200 ng/mL, and ΔIdswas measured as a function of individual analyte concentration after 30 min of additional adsorption in tenfold diluted plasma solution with a total analyte concentration of 30–600 ng/mL (PHT:TRA:DPD concentration ratio = 1:1:1) (step 2)

To gain more insights into the selective sensing of PHT, the ΔIdsof ZnO/MIP electrodes was monitored after immersion into a plasma solution containing TRA and DPD (step 1), and the same measurement was performed after 30 min of sensing in PHT-containing plasma solution (step 2) (Fig.S18). As shown in Fig.5c, the ΔIdsof the ZNR/E-MIP electrode in step 1 gradually decreased (slope =  − 0.017) owing to the effect of the increased concentration of other analytes due to nonspecific binding. On the other hand, in step 2 (addition of PHT to the plasma solution), the ΔIdsresponse increased over the entire concentration range because of the strong PHT adsorption. This response is almost the same as that shown in Fig.3c; thus, this phenomenon indicates that PHT molecules diffusing toward the imprinted cavities are selectively recognized with a higher affinity. Similarly, the ΔIdsresponse of the ZNS/E-MIP electrode in step 1 suggested nonspecific binding behavior but increased proportionally to the concentration of PHT over the entire concentration range after the addition of this analyte (Fig.5d). Thus, both ZnO/E-MIP electrodes exhibited selective sensing, with a more amplified sensing response observed for the ZNR/E-MIP electrode.

MIP-based EG-FET sensors for PHT detection in plasma were fabricated by electrodepositing MIP films on two nanostructured ZnO surfaces bound to QC electrodes to be used as extended gates. The amounts of functional monomers and the template (PHT) in the MIP precursor solution were optimized to increase the sensing response. Before examining sensing performance in analyte-containing plasma solution, we confirmed that the template could be completely removed from MIP films by monitoring changes in the electrochemical impedance and ΔIdsof the EG-FET sensor. The reproducibility of the sensing performance of the ZNR/E-MIP electrode was evaluated by PHT adsorption-removal cycling.

As determined byIdsmeasurements at a constant gate voltage of 1.5 V, the ZNR/E-MIP sensor exhibited higher sensitivity than the ZNS/E-MIP sensor in the PHT concentration range of 10–200 ng/mL. The IFs of the above electrodes were determined as 4.23 and 4.29, respectively. In addition, the ZNR/E-MIP sensor achieved a superior LOD (12.9 ng/mL) and LOQ (53.0 ng/mL) in the examined PHT concentration range and showed a high selectivity for PHT over TRA and DPD.

Overall, the MIP-based EG-FET sensors not only exhibited the advantages of easy fabrication, low cost, and reproducibility but also featured excellent transistor sensing properties depending on the monomer composition of the MIP films and the ZnO crystal structure at the extended gate. Therefore, these sensors hold great promise for the practical detection of PHT and the evaluation of its proper dosage in medical supplies.

Data cannot be shared for ethical/privacy reasons. The data underlying this article cannot be shared publicly due to the privacy of individuals that participated in the study. The data will be shared on reasonable request to the corresponding authors.

Fisher RS, van Emde BW, Blume W, Elger C, Genton P, Lee P, Engel J Jr (2005) Epileptic seizures and epilepsy: definitions proposed by the International League Against Epilepsy (ILAE) and the International Bureau for Epilepsy (IBE). Epilepsia 46:470–472

PubMedGoogle Scholar

Hughes DM, Bonnett LJ, Marson AG, García-Fiñana M (2019) Identifying patients who will not reachieve remission after breakthrough seizures. Epilepsia 60:774–782

CASPubMedPubMed CentralGoogle Scholar

Lee-Lane E, Torabi F, Lacey A, Fonferko-Shadrach B, Harris D, Akbari A, Lyons RA, Rees MI, Sawhney I, Halcox J, Powell R, Pickrell WO (2021) Epilepsy, antiepileptic drugs, and the risk of major cardiovascular events. Epilepsia 62:1604–1616

CASPubMedGoogle Scholar

Algahtani H, Shirah B, Alqahtani AJ, Al-Malki AQ (2020) Irreversible cerebellar atrophy as a complication of short-term phenytoin exposure: clinical improvement following discontinuation of the culprit. J Epilepsy Res 10:96–99

PubMedPubMed CentralGoogle Scholar

Bagdy G, Kecskemeti V, Riba P, Jakus R (2007) Serotonin and epilepsy. J Neurochem 100:857–873

Zhang JY, Liu DH, Meng XY, Shi Y, Wang RY, Xiao DL, He H (2017) Solid phase extraction based on porous magnetic graphene oxide/-cyclodextrine composite coupled with high performance liquid chromatography for determination of antiepileptic drugs in plasma samples. J Chromatogr A 1524:49–56

Zhang RQ, Wang SM, Yang Y, Deng YL, Li D, Su P, Yang Y (2018) Modification of polydopamine-coated Fe3O4nanoparticles with multi-walled carbon nanotubes for magnetic-μ-dispersive solid-phase extraction of antiepileptic drugs in biological matrices. Anal Bioanal Chem 410:3779–3788

Anilanmert B, Çavuş F, Narin I, Cengiz S, Sertler Ş, Özdemir AA, Açikkol M (2016) Simultaneous analysis method for GHB, ketamine, norketamine, phenobarbital, thiopental, zolpidem, zopiclone and phenytoin in urine, using C18 poroshell column. J Chromatogr B 1022:230–241

CASGoogle Scholar

Queiroz RHC, Bertucci C, Malfará WR, Dreossi SAC, Chaves AR, Valerio DAR, Queiroz MEC (2008) Quantification of carbamazepine, carbamazepine-10,11-epoxide, phenytoin and phenobarbital in plasma samples by stir bar-sorptive extraction and liquid chromatography. J Pharm Biomed Anal 48:428–434

Bereczki A, Tolokán A, Horvai G, Horváth V, Lanza F, Hall AJ, Sellergren B (2001) Determination of phenytoin in plasma by molecularly imprinted solid-phase extraction. J Chromatogr A 930:31–38

Abdollahi E, Abdouss M, Mohammadi A (2016) Synthesis of a nano molecularly imprinted polymeric sorbent for solid phase extraction and determination of phenytoin in plasma, urine, and wastewater by HPLC. RSC Adv 6:39095–39105

Jia MT, Zhu YY, Guo D, Bi XG, Hou XH (2020) Surface molecularly imprinted polymer based on core-shell Fe3O4@MIL-101(Cr) for selective extraction of phenytoin sodium in plasma. Anal Chim Acta 1128:211–220

Azizi A, Bottaro CS (2020) A critical review of molecularly imprinted polymers for the analysis of organic pollutants in environmental water samples. J Chromatogr A 1614:460603

Ndunda EN (2020) Molecularly imprinted polymers–a closer look at the control polymer used in determining the imprinting effect: A mini review. J Mol Recognit 33:e2855

Yang WYX, Ma YX, Sun H, Huang CX, Shen XT (2022) Molecularly imprinted polymers based optical fiber sensors: a review. Trends Anal Chem 152:116608

Cui BC, Liu P, Liu XJ, Liu SZ, Zhang ZH (2020) Molecularly imprinted polymers for electrochemical detection and analysis: progress and perspectives. J Mater Res Technol 9:12568–12584

Herrera-Chacón A, Cetó X, del Valle M (2021) Molecularly imprinted polymers–towards electrochemical sensors and electronic tongues. Anal Bioanal Chem 413:6117–6140

Diltemiz SE, Keçili R, Ersöz A, Say R (2017) Molecular imprinting technology in quartz crystal microbalance (QCM) sensors. Sensors 17:454

Google Scholar

Kaisti M (2017) Detection principles of biological and chemical FET sensors. Biosens Bioelectron 98:437–448

Syu YC, Hsu WE, Lin CT (2018) Review−field-effect transistor biosensing: devices and clinical applications. ECS J Solid State Sci Technol 7:Q3196–Q3207

Li H, Shi W, Song J, Jang HJ, Dailey J, Yu JS, Katz HE (2019) Chemical and biomolecule sensing with organic field-effect transistors. Chem Rev 119:3–35

Surya SG, Raval HN, Ahmad R, Sonar P, Salama KN, Rao VR (2019) Organic field effect transistors (OFETs) in environmental sensing and health monitoring: a review. Trends Anal Chem 111:27–36

Tao T, Zhou Y, Ma M, He H, Gao N, Cai Z, Chang G, He Y (2021) Novel graphene electrochemical transistor with ZrO2/rGO nanocomposites functionalized gate electrode for ultrasensitive recognition of methyl parathion. Sens Actuators B Chem 328:128936

Gao N, Zhou R, Tu B, Tao T, Song Y, Cai Z, He H, Chang G, Wu Y, He Y (2023) Graphene electrochemical transistor incorporated with gel electrolyte for wearable and non-invasive glucose monitoring. Anal Chim Acta 1239:340719

Gao N, Pan J, Wang L, Cai Z, Chang G, Wu Y, He Y (2023) Novel graphene electrochemical transistors incorporating zirconia inorganic molecular imprinted layer: design, construction and application for highly sensitive and selective detection of acetaminophen. Anal Chim Acta 1269:341405

Pullano SA, Critello CD, Mahbub I, Tasneem NT, Shamsir S, Islam SK, Greco M, Fiorillo AS (2018) EGFET-based sensors for bioanalytical applications: a review. Sensors 18:4042

Rao LJ, Wang P, Qian YP, Zhou GF, Nötzel R, (2020) Comparison of the extended gate field-effect transistor with direct potentiometric sensing for super-Nernstian InN/InGaN quantum dots. ACS Omega 5:32800–32805

Nishitani S, Sakata T (2018) Potentiometric adsorption isotherm analysis of a molecularly imprinted polymer interface for small-biomolecule recognition. ACS Omega 3:5382–5389

Yang HY, Nishitani S, Sakata T (2018) Potentiometric Langmuir isotherm analysis of histamine-selective molecularly imprinted polymer-based field-effect transistor. ECS J Solid State Sci Technol 7:Q3079–Q3082

Kajisa T, Sakata T (2018) Molecularly imprinted artificial biointerface for an enzyme-free glucose transistor. ACS Appl Mater Interfaces 10:34983–34990

Liu KH, Lin HY, Thomas JL, Chen CY, Chen YT, Chen CY, Yang CH, Lee MH (2022) Sensing of C-reactive protein using an extended-gate field-effect transistor with a tungsten disulfide-doped peptide-imprinted conductive polymer coating. Biosensors 12:31

Iskierko Z, Checinska A, Sharma PS, Golebiewska K, Noworyta K, Borowicz P, Fronc K, Bandi V, D’Souza F, Kutner W (2017) Molecularly imprinted polymer based extended-gate field-effect transistor chemosensors for phenylalanine enantioselective sensing. J Mater Chem C 5:969–977

Iskierko Z, Sosnowska M, Sharma PS, Benincori T, D’Souza F, Kaminska I, Fronc K, Noworyta K (2015) Extended-gate field-effect transistor (EG-FET) with molecularly imprinted polymer (MIP) film for selective inosine determination. Biosens Bioelectron 74:526–533

Iskierko Z, Sharma PS, Noworyta KR, Borowicz P, Cieplak M, Kutner W, Bossi AM (2019) Selective PQQPFPQQ gluten epitope chemical sensor with a molecularly imprinted polymer recognition unit and an extended-gate field-effect transistor transduction unit. Anal Chem 91:4537–4543

Iskierko Z, Sharma PS, Prochowicz D, Fronc K, D’Souza F, Toczydłowska D, Stefaniak F, Noworyta K (2016) Molecularly imprinted polymer (MIP) film with improved surface area developed by using metal−organic framework (MOF) for sensitive lipocalin (NGAL) determination. ACS Appl Mater Interfaces 8:19860–19865

Jiangfeng G, Zhaoming D, Qingping D, Yuan X, Weihua Z (2010) Controlled synthesis of ZnO nanostructures by electrodeposition method. J Nanomater 2010:1–6

Patella B, Moukri N, Regalbuto G, Cipollina C, Pace E, Di Vincenzo S, Aiello G, O’Riordan A, Inguanta R (2022) Electrochemical synthesis of zinc oxide nanostructures on flexible substrate and application as an electrochemical immunoglobulin-G immunosensor. Materials 15:713

Yang J, Wang YQ, Kong JH, Jia HX, Wang ZS (2015) Synthesis of ZnO nanosheets via electrodeposition method and their optical properties, growth mechanism. Opt Mater 46:179–185

Xu JQ, Xue ZG, Qin N, Cheng ZX, Xiang Q (2017) The crystal facet-dependent gas sensing properties of ZnO nanosheets: experimental and computational study. Sens Actuators B Chem 242:148–157

Sun JJ, Zhou DM, Fang HQ, Chen HY (1998) The electrochemical copolymerization of 3,4-dihydroxybenzoic acid and aniline at microdisk gold electrode and its amperometric determination for ascorbic acid. Talanta 45:851–856

Marczewska B, Przegaliński M (2013) Poly(catechol) electroactive film and its electrochemical properties. Synth Met 182:33–39

Pourghobadi R, Nematollahi D, Baezzat MR, Alizadeh S, Goljani H (2020) Electropolymerization of catechol on wireless graphite electrode, unusual cathodic polycatechol formation. J Electroanal Chem 866:114180

Ayankojo AG, Boroznjak R, Reut J, Öpik A, Syritski V (2022) Molecularly imprinted polymer based electrochemical sensor for quantitative detection of SARS-CoV-2 spike protein. Sens Actuators B Chem 353:131160

Khoubnasabjafari M, Salari R, Samadi A, Jouyban-Gharamaleki V, Jouyban A (2019) Colorimetric determination of phenytoin using indoxyl sulfate capped silver nanoparticles. Anal Methods 11:3324–3330

Hösli R, Tobler A, König S, Mühlebach S (2013) A quantitative phenytoin GC–MS method and its validation for samples from human ex situ brain microdialysis, blood and saliva using solid-phase extraction. J Anal Toxicol 37:102–109

Abdollahi E, Khalafi-Nezhad A, Mohammadi A, Abdouss M, Salami-Kalajahi M (2018) Synthesis of new molecularly imprinted polymer via reversible addition fragmentation transfer polymerization as a drug delivery system. Polymer 143:245–257

Yen YK, Chiu CY (2020) A CMOS MEMS-based membrane-bridge nanomechanical sensor for small molecule detection. Sci Rep 10:2931

Download references

This study was supported by the Basic Science Research Program through the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF), funded by the Ministry of Education (NRF-2020R1I1A3070148) and the Ministry of Science and ICT (RS-2023–00240220).

Department of Polymer Science & Engineering, Kyungpook National University, 80 Daehak-Ro, Daegu, 41566, Republic of Korea

Jin Chul Yang, Nari Shin, Seok Jin Lim, Deepshikha Hazarika & Jinyoung Park

Department of Food Science and Technology, and GreenTech-based Food Safety Research Group, BK21 Four, Chung-Ang University, Anseong, 17546, Republic of Korea

Chae Hwan Cho & Jong Pil Park

You can also search for this author inPubMedGoogle Scholar

Correspondence toJong Pil ParkorJinyoung Park.

This work did not involve human or animal samples.

The authors declare no competing interests.

Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

Below is the link to the electronic supplementary material.

Springer Nature or its licensor (e.g. a society or other partner) holds exclusive rights to this article under a publishing agreement with the author(s) or other rightsholder(s); author self-archiving of the accepted manuscript version of this article is solely governed by the terms of such publishing agreement and applicable law.

Reprints and permissions

Yang, J.C., Shin, N., Lim, S.J.et al.Molecularly imprinted polymer-based extended-gate field-effect transistor chemosensors for selective determination of antiepileptic drug.Microchim Acta191, 400 (2024). https://doi.org/10.1007/s00604-024-06487-x

Download citation

Received:16 February 2024

Accepted:04 June 2024

Published:15 June 2024

DOI:https://doi.org/10.1007/s00604-024-06487-x

Anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:

Sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article.

Provided by the Springer Nature SharedIt content-sharing initiative

View in articleFull size image

146.137.70.67

Argonne Research Library (8200955775)  - Department of Energy DOE Labs (3000179256)  - Colorado Alliance of Research Libraries (8200982549)

© 2025 Springer Nature

AbstractUltrathin molecularly imprinted polymer (MIP) films were deposited on the surfaces of ZnO nanorods (ZNRs) and nanosheets (ZNSs) by electropolymerization to afford extended-gate field-effect transistor sensors for detecting phenytoin (PHT) in plasma. Molecular imprinting efficiency was optimized by controlling the contents of functional monomers and the template in the precursor solution. PHT sensing was performed in plasma solutions with various concentrations by monitoring the drain current as a function of drain voltage under an applied gate voltage of 1.5 V. The reliability and reproducibility of the fabricated sensors were evaluated through a solution treatment process for complete PHT removal and PHT adsorption-removal cycling, while selectivity was examined by analyzing responses to chemicals with structures analogous to that of PHT. Compared with the ZNS/extracted-MIP sensor and sensors with non-imprinted polymer (NIP) films, the ZNR/extracted-MIP sensor showed superior responses to PHT-containing plasma due to selective PHT adsorption, achieving an imprinting factor of 4.23, detection limit of 12.9 ng/mL, quantitation limit of 53.0 ng/mL, and selectivity coefficients of 3–4 (against tramadol) and ~ 5 (against diphenhydramine). Therefore, we believe that the MIP-based ZNR sensing platform is promising for the practical detection of PHT and other drugs and evaluation of their proper dosages.Graphical abstractSimilar content being viewed by othersMolecularly Imprinted Polymer Based GCE for Ultra-sensitive Voltammetric and Potentiometric Bio Sensing of TopiramateArticle13 November 2020Eco-friendly bupropion detection sensor with co-formulated dextromethorphan in AUVELITY tablet and spiked plasmaArticleOpen access26 November 2024Molecular imprinted polymer-based potentiometric approach for the determination of carvedilol and ivabradine hydrochloride in dosage form, spiked human plasma and in presence of their oxidative degradatesArticleOpen access07 February 2025Use our pre-submission checklistAvoid common mistakes on your manuscript.IntroductionEpilepsy is a chronic neurological disease that is characterized by a persistent predisposition to seizures and leads to numerous neurobiological, cognitive, and psychosocial consequences [1]. Currently, long-term treatment with antiepileptics fails to induce seizure remission in > 30% of patients but may increase the likelihood of cardiovascular diseases [2,3]. Phenytoin (PHT), a common antiseizure drug widely used in clinical practice, exerts antiepileptic effects by stabilizing the function of brain cell membranes and increasing the levels of inhibitory neurotransmitters (serotonin and γ-aminobutyric acid) in the brain [4,5]. Generally, the concentration of antiepileptics in plasma is maintained within the range of 10–20 μg/mL to minimize toxic effects and achieve sufficient seizure control; therefore, it should be closely monitored to control the therapeutic regimen and optimize the clinical outcome.To date, antiepileptics have been analyzed using solid-phase [6,7], liquid–liquid [8], and stir-bar sorptive [9] extractions in combination with chromatographic methods. Given that conventional solid-phase extraction relies on generic properties such as hydrophobicity and is therefore of limited use, molecularly imprinted polymers (MIPs) have been employed to realize selective PHT extraction [10,11,12]. Typically, molecular imprinting based on the polymerization of functional monomers around a template molecule in the presence of a cross-linker followed by template removal provides polymeric materials with binding pockets capable of selectively binding and recognizing target analytes. In addition to their use in extraction systems, MIPs are employed as recognition units in chemosensors to increase their sensitivity and selectivity [13,14]. Various analytical methods using optical, electrochemical, and piezoelectric signal transducers can be used to determine the amount of analyte adsorbed on MIP sensing platforms [15,16,17,18].Field-effect transistor (FET)-based chemo- and biosensors have been used extensively to achieve ultrasensitive electronic detection, miniaturization, and low-cost manufacturing [19,20,21,22]. Additionally, graphene electrochemical transistor sensors (GECTs) have been explored for chemical sensing applications, due to their intrinsic amplification effect and chemical stability [23,24,25]. Extended-gate FET (EG-FET) sensors are one of the first miniaturized chemosensors applied in medicine, food and biological process analyses, and environmental monitoring [26,27]. MIP-based EG-FET sensors employ two types of commercially available FETs, namely junction-type FETs (JFETs) and metal–oxide–semiconductor FETs (MOSFETs), to collect electrical signals caused by selective analyte detection and feature an extended-gate surface that can be easily (electro)chemically modified via molecular imprinting. JFET-based sensors show relatively rapid concentration-dependent responses to potential changes at the extended-gate surface and are therefore well suited for the direct characterization and detection of small biomolecules such as oligosaccharides and histamines [28,29,30]. However, in the case of MOSFETs, the transistor characteristics are determined at a constant gate voltage vs. the reference electrode, while the drain voltage is scanned within a specific potential range [31]. In such systems, the extended-gate surface is preferentially coated by conducting MIP films owing to their electrical conductivity and redox properties [31]. Iskierko et al. studied the ability of EG-FET chemosensors with MIP films generated by the electropolymerization of thiophene derivatives to selectively sense and quantify enantiomers, biomarkers, and proteins, among others [32,33,34,35], revealing that these platforms hold great promise for achieving miniaturization, ease of handling, high sensitivity, and low cost. In addition, they investigated the use of increased-surface-area MIP films as recognition units for protein detection and employed a sacrificial metal–organic framework to facilitate the access of proteins to recognition sites [34]. However, the design of structured recognition units to increase the surface area of MIP films for the development of enhanced and efficient sensing platforms remains challenging. To address this challenge, we herein developed EG-FET chemosensors featuring two morphologically different high-surface-area ZnO patterns electrochemically grown on Au-coated quartz crystal (QC) electrodes. A PHT-imprinted polymer matrix (MIP film) was prepared on these patterns using the cyclic voltammetry (CV)-induced coelectropolymerization of catechol (CAT) and 3,4-dihydroxybenzaldehyde (3,4-DHBA), and the monomer composition was optimized to achieve highly sensitive detection. In the resulting sensors, the PHT-imprinted polymer matrix acted as the recognition unit, while the EG-FET acted as the signal transduction unit. Additionally, a non-imprinted polymer (NIP)-based chemosensor was prepared, and the sensitivities and selectivities of the four sensors (two MIP-based chemosensors + two corresponding NIP-based chemosensors) in PHT-containing plasma solutions were evaluated and compared.Experimental sectionMaterialsZnCl2reagent grade (≥ 98% purity) was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich Co. (MO, USA), while KCl (extra pure, 99%) was purchased from Duksan Pure Chemicals Co. (Ansan, South Korea). CAT (GC, > 99%) and 3,4-DHBA (GC, > 98%) were purchased from Tokyo Chemical Industry Co. (Tokyo, Japan). PHT (> 99%), Na2HPO4·2H2O (extra pure, > 98%), and NaH2PO4·2H2O (99%) were obtained from Acros Organics (Geel, Belgium). Tramadol hydrochloride (TRA, HPCL grade, ≥ 99%) and diphenhydramine hydrochloride (DPD, HPCL grade, ≥ 98%) were obtained from Sigma-Aldrich Co. (MO, USA). Artificial plasma fluid (BZ273, pH 7.4, ≥ 99.9%) was supplied by Biochemazone (Alberta, Canada). The major compositions of the plasma are ion (Na+, K+, Mg2+, Ca+, Cl−, HCO3−, HPO42−, SO42−), amino acids, and proteins (serum albumin). The plasma was diluted tenfold with sodium phosphate buffer (Na-PB, 0.1 M, pH 7.0) before use. K4[Fe(CN)6] (≥ 99.95%) was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich Co. (MO, USA). All chemicals were used without further purification.Electrodeposition of ZnO nanostructuresZnO nanostructures were electrodeposited using a typical three-electrode cell interfaced with a potentiostat (Keithley 2450-EC, Tektronix Inc. OR., USA). A 9-MHz Au-coated AT-cut QC (QA-A9M AU[M], Seiko EG&G, Seiko Instruments, Inc., Tokyo, Japan) chip (5 mm in diameter) was used as the working electrode. The QC chip consists of Au top-layer and Ti under-layer, and the thickness of Au and Ti layer is 300 nm and 100 nm, respectively. Pt wire and Ag/AgCl were used as counter and reference electrodes, respectively. After connecting the QC chip mounted on the dip-type cell, Pt wire, and Ag/AgCl to the Keithley 2450-EC, electrodeposition was performed at 80 °C in an oil bath under 150 rpm stirring using a precursor solution prepared by dissolving ZnCl2and KCl in deionized (DI) water (80 mL) to concentrations of 5 mM and 0.1 M, respectively. ZnO nanorod (ZNR) films were electrodeposited on the QC electrode through chronoamperometry at a constant applied voltage (− 1.0 V, 15 min), while ZnO nanosheet (ZNS) films were prepared by sequential chronopotentiometry (− 0.15 mA, 45 min) and chronoamperometry (− 2.0 V, 5 min). Both ZnO films were rinsed with DI water and dried with N2gas.Formation of MIPs on ZnO electrodesMIP films were electrodeposited on QC electrodes with ZnO nanostructures (ZNR and ZNS) by CV at applied voltages from − 0.2 to 0.8 V and a scan rate of 10 mV/s over three scans using Parstat 4000 potentiostat (Princeton Applied Research, TN., USA) based on a three-electrode cell. The monomer and template concentrations in the MIP precursor solution (sodium phosphate buffer (Na-PB; 20 mL, 0.1 M, pH 7.0) containing PHT, CAT, and 3,4-DHBA) were optimized to maximize molecular imprinting efficiency (TablesS1andS2). After their formation, the MIP films were rinsed with DI water and immersed into a 1:1 (v/v) mixture of methanol and DI water for 30 min to remove the imprinted PHT template and then rinsed several times with DI water and dried with N2gas to afford extracted-MIP (E-MIP) films. NIP films were fabricated using the same procedure but without the PHT template.Surface characterizationThe surface morphologies of the ZnO patterns, MIP films, and E-MIP films were investigated using field-emission scanning electron microscopy (FE-SEM; Hitachi SU8220, Tokyo, Japan) at an accelerating voltage of 5 kV. All samples were coated with a thin Pt layer to obtain high-quality images. A Fourier transform infrared (FT-IR) spectrometer (Frontier, PerkinElmer, MA, USA) with an attenuated total reflectance (ATR) mode was used to investigate the chemical characterizations of ZnO patterns, MIP, E-MIP, and NIP films. The crystallographic features of the two ZnO patterns were probed using X-ray diffraction (XRD; Empyrean, Panalytical, Almelo, Netherlands) with CuKαradiation (λ= 1.54059 Å) in the 2θrange of 20–100° and step-scan mode (step size = 0.04°). ZnO/MIP film morphology was probed by transmission electron microscopy (TEM; Hitachi HT-7700, Tokyo, Japan). For these measurements, the film was scraped off from the QC electrode and dispersed in ethanol. Aliquots of the resulting dispersion were placed on carbon-coated TEM grids (CF200-Cu, Electron Microscopy Sciences, Washington, USA), dried for a day, and imaged at an accelerating voltage of 100 kV. The removal of the imprinted PHT template from both films was confirmed by electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) measurements performed in a three-electrode cell (film = working electrode, Pt wire = counter electrode, Ag/AgCl = reference electrode). A DC potential of 0.2 V was applied at an amplitude of 10 mV in the frequency range of 100 kHz to 0.1 Hz in Na-PB (10 mL, 0.1 M, pH 7.0) containing 10 mM K4[Fe(CN)6] (redox ion probe), and charge transfer resistance (Rct) was calculated by simulating the obtained plots using the R(Q(RW)) circuit in ZSimpWin software (Ametek, USA).Sensing performance evaluationSensor responses were recorded using a Keithley 4200 A-SCS parameter analyzer (Tektronix Inc., OR, USA) and a commercialn-MOSFET in enhancement mode (CD4007UB, Texas Instruments, TX, USA) connected to an extended gate (ZnO/MIP film on QC electrodes). Film-coated QC electrodes were mounted on a well-type QC microbalance cell and connected to the N channel gate. After the cell was charged with Na-PB (0.1 M, pH 7.0), the reference electrode was immersed into the solution at a distance of 5 mm from the working electrode. The drain currents (Ids) of films at each preparation step (including PHT sensing) were collected at an applied gate voltage of 1.5 V to establish optimal conditions associated with high imprinting efficiency. The sensing performances of MIP films were examined by determining the drain current change (ΔIds) of the EG-FET in PHT-containing plasma solution diluted tenfold with Na-PB (0.1 M, pH 7.0). Sensitivity, binding kinetics, and selectivity were evaluated in diluted plasma solution at PHT concentrations of 10–200 ng/mL. For sensitivity determination,Idswas monitored under the abovementioned conditions after 30-min immersion into the PHT solution. For selectivity determination,Idswas recorded after 30-min incubation in diluted plasma solutions containing one analyte (PHT, TRA, or DPD @ 10–200 ng/mL) or all analytes (total analyte concentration = 30–600 ng/mL). Selectivity was further assessed by conducting measurements after 30-min immersion into a plasma solution containing both TRA and DPD (total analyte concentration = 20–400 ng/mL). ΔIdswas measured after adding PHT (10–200 ng/mL) to an analogous solution followed by 30-min immersion for PHT adsorption. In this case, the total concentration was 30–600 ng/mL, and the PHT:TRA:DPD mass ratio equaled 1:1:1.Results and discussionMIP formation on ZnO electrodeThe formation of vertically aligned ZNRs on the QC electrode increased the surface area of the electropolymerized MIP film (analyte recognition unit) and enabled efficient signal collection on the drain part of the EG-FET sensing transducer as ann-type oxide semiconductor. Figure1a illustrates the steps involved in sensor fabrication. ZNRs and flower-like ZNSs were electrodeposited on QC electrodes under the chosen conditions to achieve controlled surface morphology and conductivity. Various parameters such as applied voltage, electrolyte concentration, and deposition time can be adjusted to optimize the diameter, density, and length of ZNRs. As shown in Fig.S1, the growth of ZNRs was observed corresponding to the deposition time under controlled applied voltage of − 1.0 V and zinc concentration of 5 mM [36]. Depending on the deposition time, ZNRs were observed to gradually grow and become densely packed, resulting in optimal density at 15 min. As shown in Fig.1b, hexagonally structured ZNRs exhibited highly oriented growth in the direction perpendicular to the QC electrode and had a length of 190–267 nm and a diameter of 66–95 nm (aspect ratio = 2.8–2.9); in contrast, ZNSs featured a two-dimensional structure with random flake-like grains. In view of their morphological features, both ZnO nanostructures provided an increased surface area for template imprinting. The electroactive surface areas for bare QC, ZnR, and ZnO electrodes, determined using the de Randles–Sevcik equation, are denoted as 0.1933, 0.3125, and 0.2502 cm2, respectively (Fig.S2). Figure1c presents the XRD patterns of the electrodeposited ZnO nanostructures. The high-intensity peaks of ZNRs at 34.46° and 62.74° corresponded to the (002) and (103) planes, respectively, and matched the hexagonal ZnO (wurtzite) structure. The high intensity of the (002) peak indicated the presence of well-shapedc-axis-oriented hexagonal columns [37]. The XRD pattern of ZNSs well matched the standard diffraction pattern of wurtzite, featuring peaks at 31.74°, 34.46°, 36.18°, 47.46°, 56.46°, 62.90°, and 67.82° due to diffraction from the (100), (002), (101), (102), (110), (103), and (112) crystal planes, respectively (JCPDS No. 36–1451), and indicating a polycrystalline wurtzite structure [38,39].Fig. 1aSchematic of electropolymerization-based PHT imprinting on QC electrodes with ZNRs.bTop-view and cross-sectional SEM images of ZNRs and ZNSs (scale bar = 1 μm).cXRD patterns of electrodeposited ZNRs and ZNSs.dCV curves recorded for different monomer compositions (TableS1) in 0.1 M Na-PB (pH 7.0) used to fabricate ZNR/MIP films (only the first cycle is shown).eTEM images of ZNR/MIP film obtained under optimal conditions (scan rate = 10 mV/s, number of cycles = 3, precursor solution = 0.1 M Na-PB (pH 7.0) containing 3 mM CAT, 3 mM 3,4-DHBA, and 0.25 mM PHT.fSchematic of EG-FET chemosensor featuring a ZNR/MIP film-coated QC electrode connected to the MOSFET gate.gDrain current (Ids)–drain voltage (Vds) plots recorded for bare Au and ZNR/MIP electrodes as well as for ZNR/E-MIP after PHT extraction and after 30-min PHT sensing in 0.1 M Na-PB (pH 7.0) containing 10 μg/mL PHT.hDrain current change (ΔIds) on six ZNR/E-MIP electrodes after PHT sensing (30 min) in 0.1 M Na-PB (pH 7.0) containing 10 μg/mL PHT. The six E-MIP films were prepared by extracting PHT from ZNR/MIP films fabricated using monomer and template concentrations listed in TableS1Full size imageCAT serves as the backbone monomer, while 3,4-DHBA acts as the functional monomer capable of hydrogen bonding with PHT. The ratio between these two components in the polymer matrix is crucial for efficient PHT imprinting. Hence, the concentration dependence of CAT and 3,4-DHBA was investigated for optimizing the composition of the polymer matrix at a fixed PHT concentration of 0.25 mM. According to the literature, the oxidation peak of 3,4-DHBA on a bare gold electrode occurs at 0.83 V [40]. However, a weak oxidation peak attributed to the Na-PB (pH 7.0) was observed at 0.85 V. To minimize buffer effect, cyclic voltammetry (CV) was conducted within the applied voltage range of − 0.2 to 0.8 V. Due to its non-electroactive nature, PHT was not considered when setting up the electrochemical conditions. The first CV curves recorded for the monomer compositions listed in TableS1(MIP1–6) featured two current values at 0.65 and 0.80 V corresponding to the formation of CAT and 3,4-DHBA radicals (Fig.1d), which underwent coupling to result in MIP film deposition on the ZnO surface [40,41,42]. A decrease in the oxidation peak at 0.65 V was observed with decreasing CAT concentration from 5 to 0 mM (MIP1 to MIP6), while the current value at 0.8 V increases with the concentration of 3,4-DHBA, rising from 1 to 6 mM. TEM imaging (Fig.1e) showed that an approximately 10-nm-thick MIP film was electrodeposited on the entire ZNR surface after three CV cycles.Optimization of molecular imprinting efficiencyFigure1f illustrates the structure of the prepared EG-FET sensor. When a positive voltage with respect to the source of then-type MOSFET channel was applied to the gate, the electrons (majority carriers in the substrate) were attracted to the surface of the gate and formed a conducting channel between the source and drain. Accordingly, the transistor characteristics were determined at a constant gate voltage vs. the Pt reference electrode (Vg= 1.50 V), while the drain voltage (Vds) was scanned from 0 to 1.0 V. The change inIdswas monitored for all MIP-based EG-FET sensors after 30-min incubation in 0.1 M Na-PB (pH 7.0) containing 0.25 mM PHT (Figs.1g andS3). Furthermore, similar monitoring was performed in 0.1 M Na-PB (pH 7.0) for each step used to prepare E-MIP films on ZnO arrays. Comparison of these two configurations (i.e., E-MIP and sensing on Fig.1g) determines the detectable window. A highIds(23 μA) was observed for the bare Au QC electrode owing to its high conductivity. The deposition of MIP films generated a distinct change inIds. In the case of the ZNR/MIP3 electrode (Fig.1g),Idsabruptly decreased as the large amount of imprinted insulating PHT molecules in the matrix hindered current flow at the extended gate. In the case of all E-MIP films,Idsdecreased with increasing amount of 3,4-DHBA used for MIP film formation. Thus, the monomer ratio in the electropolymerized random copolymer matrix with imprinted PHT molecules significantly affectedIds, with the largest difference inIdsbetween MIP and E-MIP electrodes observed at a CAT:3,4-DHBA molar ratio of 1:1 (MIP-3, Fig.1g). This result implied that MIP3 was best suited for PHT recognition. For all E-MIP films,Idsdecreased upon PHT sensing but completely recovered to the value of the original MIP films, which indicated effective PHT recognition in accordance with the produced imprinted cavities. Among the tested ZNR/E-MIP electrodes, ZNR/E-MIP3 presented the largest ΔIdsof ~ 10.3 μA upon PHT sensing, thus featuring the widest detection window (Fig.1h). To further optimize imprinting conditions based on the composition (CAT:3,4-DHBA = 1:1, mol/mol) of the E-MIP3 film, we adjusted the amount of the PHT template to make as many cavities as possible in the MIP matrix (TableS2), revealing that molecular imprinting efficiency depended on the number of imprinted cavities, i.e., on the amount of PHT (Fig.S4). Within the examined ranges, the widest detection window (ΔIds) was obtained at a PHT concentration of 0.25 mM. Thus, a sufficiently amplifiedIdssignal could be monitored using the ZNR/MIP3-3 electrode, which exhibited high sensitivity to PHT and a high imprinting factor (IF; ΔIds,MIP/ΔIds,NIP≈ 5.2).Stability and reproducibility of sensing performanceThe optimized electropolymerization conditions were used to fabricate MIP-based EG-FET chemosensors, i.e., those with ZnO/MIP3-3 electrodes. SEM imaging (Fig.2a, b) showed no significant differences in surface morphology between the ZnO and ZnO/MIP electrodes because of the ultralow thickness of the MIP film produced via only three CV cycles. Similarly, no significant morphological differences were observed after PHT removal (Fig.S5). The formed poly(CAT-co-3,4-DHBA) films were characterized by FT-IR spectra (Fig.S6).Fig. 2Top-view (upper) and cross-sectional (lower) SEM images ofaZNR/MIP andbZNS/MIP electrodes. Insets represent high-resolution images. All scale bars equal 1 μm.cEIS responses of bare Au and ZNR electrodes as well as those of ZNR/MIP electrodes before and after specific extraction times (10–40 min) measured in Na-PB solution (0.1 M, pH 7.0) containing 10 mM K4[Fe(CN)6].dΔIdsof ZNR/MIP film during repeated PHT adsorption (30 min in tenfold diluted plasma solution containing 1 μg/mL PHT) and desorption (1 h 30 min in a 1:1 (v/v) mixture of methanol and DI water)Full size imageTo confirm template removal from the imprinted matrix, we performed EIS measurements at different template extraction times and then evaluated impedimetric changes at the surface interfaces due to the formation of PHT-detecting cavities. The ZnO/MIP electrodes were incubated in the extraction solution, and Nyquist plots were recorded after 10, 20, 30, and 40 min to determineRct. As shown in Figs.2c andS7, these plots contained a high-frequency semicircular portion and a low-frequency linear portion. The semicircles were fitted using the R(Q(RW)) equivalent circuit model (Fig.2c, inset), whereRsdenotes the solution resistance,Zwis the Warburg impedance, andQis the constant phase element. TheRctvalues of the produced MIPs were almost the same as those of pure ZNRs and ZNSs. However, with increasing extraction time,Rctdecreased to 1171 Ω (ZNR/MIP) or 4204 Ω (ZNS/MIP) because of the removal of the insulating template from the MIP matrix. At ≥ 30 min,Rctstopped changing, which was indicative of complete PHT removal. Moreover, the validity of the PHT extraction process was confirmed by monitoring the change inIdsas a function of extraction time in EG-FET systems (Fig.S8). In all cases,Idsincreased upon PHT extraction and stopped changing after 25 min, which indicated that complete template removal was achieved at this timepoint. Sensor reusability was evaluated by measuring ΔIdsfor the ZNR/MIP electrode over five sequential PHT sensing-removal cycles (Fig.2d). During cycling, ΔIdsstayed constant at − 11 ± 0.3 μA, which was indicative of high sensor stability and reproducibility. The recoveries, defined as ΔIdsfor PHT adsorption / ΔIdsfor PHT removal, are in the acceptable range from 96 to 101%, with relative standard deviation (RSD) values of 1.91% and bias values ranging from − 2.3 to 2.5%. These results indicate excellent precision and accuracy in aspect of reusability and sustainable repeatability and robustness in the operational conditions. Furthermore, the short-term stability of ZNR/MIP electrode was investigated by measuring − ΔIdsafter PHT adsorption once every 2 days. As shown in Fig.S9, the electrode showed the highly constant ΔIdsvalues within − 10.9 ± 0.1 μA with RSD ranging from 1.2 to 3.2 during at least 7 days.Electrochemical sensing behaviorThe kinetics of PHT adsorption on ZNS/E-MIP and ZNR/E-MIP electrodes was evaluated in plasma solutions containing 10, 100, and 500 ng/mL PHT. Fig.S10shows that upon 30-min exposure to PHT, theIdsof the ZnO/E-MIP electrodes decreased. The extent of this decrease increased with increasing PHT concentration and (at a given PHT concentration) was higher for ZNR/E-MIP than for ZNS/E-MIP. Figure3a shows that for the ZNR/E-MIP electrode, the absolute value of ΔIdslinearly increased over 25 min at all PHT concentrations, with saturation observed at ≥ 100 ng/mL PHT. In contrast, a much lower increase in |ΔIds| was observed for the ZNS/E-MIP electrode (Fig.3b) because of the low sensing response of its recognition unit due to inefficient cavity formation during molecular imprinting on the ZNS structure.Fig. 3ΔIdsofaZNR/E-MIP andbZNS/E-MIP electrodes as a function of adsorption time. Measurements were performed under an applied gate voltage of 1.5 V at a constant adsorption time interval (5 min) in tenfold diluted plasma solutions containing 10, 100, or 500 ng/mL PHT. ΔIdsofcZnO/E-MIP anddZnO/E-NIP films as a function of PHT concentration and corresponding linear fits. Measurements were performed after 30-min adsorption in tenfold diluted plasma solutions containing 10–200 ng/mL PHTFull size imageFurthermore, theIdsof ZNR and ZNS E-MIP/E-NIP pairs was measured in plasma solutions with 10–200 ng/mL PHT to investigate the concentration dependence of PHT adsorption. TheIdsof the ZNR/E-MIP electrode during 30-min exposure to 200 ng/mL PHT dropped to a value close to that originally observed for the PHT-imprinted film (Fig.S11), which indicated that PHT fully occupied the recognition cavities. The ZNS/E-MIP electrode demonstrated similar sensing behavior but a lower response because of the narrow detection range. In contrast, both NIP-based EG-FET sensors showed only small changes inIdsover the entire PHT concentration range because of the nonspecific adsorption of this analyte. As shown in Fig.3c, the EG-FET sensor with the ZNR/E-MIP electrode demonstrated a higher sensitivity of –0.033 μA/(ng/mL) with correlation coefficient (R2) = 0.996 compared to that of the ZNS/E-MIP electrode, which showed a sensitivity of –0.018 μA/(ng/mL) withR2= 0.941. For both ZnO/E-NIP films, |ΔIds| showed a negligible increase over the examined concentration range (Fig.3d). Based on the slopes of the ΔIds– PHT concentration curves, IFs of 4.23 and 4.29 were calculated for ZNR/E-MIP and ZNS/E-MIP electrodes, respectively. These values were similar, as the same number of imprinted cavities was formed by electropolymerization in the solution with the same monomer composition. However, a distinct amplification of the sensing signal on the electrical transducer was observed when the ZNR/E-MIP electrode was used for PHT sensing. Moreover, when both ZnO/E-MIP electrodes were used to sense PHT at higher concentrations (> 200 ng/mL), ΔIdsreached saturation because of the limited adsorption capacity of the MIP films (Fig.S12). The linear fits in Fig.3c were used to calculate the limit of detection (LOD) and the limit of quantitation (LOQ) ask×S/m, whereSis the standard deviation of they-intercept andmis the sensitivity (i.e., the slope of the calibration curve withkequal to the signal-to-noise ratio (k= 3 for LOD and 10 for LOQ)) [43]. The PHT LODs and LOQs were estimated as 12.9 and 53.0 ng/mL for ZNR/E-MIP, respectively, and as 43.1 and 176.7 ng/mL for ZNS/E-MIP, respectively. Compared to other recently reported PHT sensors, including those described by our group, the ZNR/E-MIP sensor showed excellent performance (i.e., LOD, LOQ, and IF) (Table1).Table 1 PHT sensing performance of the sensors developed herein and reported previouslyFull size tableTo evaluate the selectivity of the ZNR/E-MIP sensor, we recordedIdsafter 30-min exposure to a plasma solution containing 10–200 ng/mL of TRA or DPD (Fig.4a, b). In both cases,Idsdecreased with increasing concentration, which was ascribed to nonspecific adsorption. Figure4c shows ΔIdsas a function of analyte concentration, showing that in the case of TRA and DPD, a gentle linear decrease in ΔIdswith increasing concentration was observed. This behavior suggested the within the examined concentration range, the analytes nonspecifically bound to the imprinted surface through weak interactions with the MIP matrix. The slopes of the linear fits obtained for TRA and DPD were lower than the slope obtained for PHT (Fig.3c and dashed line in Fig.4c). When the ZNR/E-MIP sensor was incubated (30 min) in plasma solution containing all three analytes in a 1:1:1 weight ratio (Fig.S13), a pronounced decrease inIdswas observed with increasing total analyte concentration. The signal change due to PHT adsorption (Fig.4c) was almost identical to that in the PHT solution, as expected for the selective adsorption of PHT on the imprinted cavities owing to their strong adsorption affinity.Fig. 4Ids–Vdscurves of the ZNR/E-MIP electrode measured after 30-min incubation in tenfold diluted plasma solution containing 10–200 ng/mL ofaTRA orbDPD.cExpected interactions of the ZNR/E-MIP electrode with TRA and DPD.dΔIdsof ZNR/MIP electrode as a function of TRA and DPD concentrations and corresponding linear fits. The calibration curve obtained for PHT (Fig.3c) is presented by a dashed line as a reference. Sensing in a solution containing PHT, TRA, and DPD was performed at a PHT:TRA:DPD mass ratio of 1:1:1Full size imageFor the ZNS/E-MIP electrode, selectivity against other chemicals was investigated following the same procedure (Figs.5a andS14) and was lower than that of the ZNR/E-MIP electrode over the entire PHT concentration range. Moreover, when the NIP films were electrodeposited on ZNR and ZNS surfaces, no significant change in ΔIdswas observed for the detection of all analytes (Figs.5b,S15, andS16). These results indicate that NIP films without any imprinted cavities nonspecifically adsorbed limited amounts of each analyte with no significant selectivity for PHT. The selectivity coefficient (α) of PHT on the ZNR/E-MIP electrode (i.e., the ratio between the ΔIdsof PHT and that of other chemicals) equaled 3–4 against TRA and ~ 5 against DPD within the concentration range of 50–200 ng/mL except for the lowest concentration of 10 ng/mL (Fig.S17a). Under the same conditions, the ZNR/E-NIP electrode exhibited poor selectivity (α= 1) regardless of the analyte structure. In contrast, no significant difference in selectivity against TRA was observed between the ZNS/E-MIP and ZNS/E-NIP electrodes (α≈ 1.5) (Fig.S17b). Notably, the ZNS/E-MIP electrode had a relatively high selectivity for DPD (α= 3–4) owing to the structure of this analyte.Fig. 5ΔIdsas a function of analyte concentration (and corresponding linear fits) measured foraZNS/E-MIP andbZNR/E-NIP electrodes after 30-min incubation in tenfold diluted plasma solution containing individual analytes at concentrations of 10–200 ng/mL. The calibration curve of PHT is represented by a dashed line as a reference. For sensing in a solution containing all three analytes, the PHT:TRA:DPD mass ratio equaled 1:1:1.c, dΔIdsas a function of individual analyte concentration and the corresponding linear fits obtained forcZNR/E-MIP anddZNS/E-NIP electrodes after 30-min incubation in tenfold diluted plasma solution containing two analogous analytes (step 1). Sensing in a solution containing TRA and DPD was performed at a TRA:DPD mass ratio of 1:1 and a total analyte concentration of 20–400 ng/mL. After measurements in step 1, PHT was added to the tenfold diluted plasma solution at concentrations of 10–200 ng/mL, and ΔIdswas measured as a function of individual analyte concentration after 30 min of additional adsorption in tenfold diluted plasma solution with a total analyte concentration of 30–600 ng/mL (PHT:TRA:DPD concentration ratio = 1:1:1) (step 2)Full size imageTo gain more insights into the selective sensing of PHT, the ΔIdsof ZnO/MIP electrodes was monitored after immersion into a plasma solution containing TRA and DPD (step 1), and the same measurement was performed after 30 min of sensing in PHT-containing plasma solution (step 2) (Fig.S18). As shown in Fig.5c, the ΔIdsof the ZNR/E-MIP electrode in step 1 gradually decreased (slope =  − 0.017) owing to the effect of the increased concentration of other analytes due to nonspecific binding. On the other hand, in step 2 (addition of PHT to the plasma solution), the ΔIdsresponse increased over the entire concentration range because of the strong PHT adsorption. This response is almost the same as that shown in Fig.3c; thus, this phenomenon indicates that PHT molecules diffusing toward the imprinted cavities are selectively recognized with a higher affinity. Similarly, the ΔIdsresponse of the ZNS/E-MIP electrode in step 1 suggested nonspecific binding behavior but increased proportionally to the concentration of PHT over the entire concentration range after the addition of this analyte (Fig.5d). Thus, both ZnO/E-MIP electrodes exhibited selective sensing, with a more amplified sensing response observed for the ZNR/E-MIP electrode.ConclusionsMIP-based EG-FET sensors for PHT detection in plasma were fabricated by electrodepositing MIP films on two nanostructured ZnO surfaces bound to QC electrodes to be used as extended gates. The amounts of functional monomers and the template (PHT) in the MIP precursor solution were optimized to increase the sensing response. Before examining sensing performance in analyte-containing plasma solution, we confirmed that the template could be completely removed from MIP films by monitoring changes in the electrochemical impedance and ΔIdsof the EG-FET sensor. The reproducibility of the sensing performance of the ZNR/E-MIP electrode was evaluated by PHT adsorption-removal cycling.As determined byIdsmeasurements at a constant gate voltage of 1.5 V, the ZNR/E-MIP sensor exhibited higher sensitivity than the ZNS/E-MIP sensor in the PHT concentration range of 10–200 ng/mL. The IFs of the above electrodes were determined as 4.23 and 4.29, respectively. In addition, the ZNR/E-MIP sensor achieved a superior LOD (12.9 ng/mL) and LOQ (53.0 ng/mL) in the examined PHT concentration range and showed a high selectivity for PHT over TRA and DPD.Overall, the MIP-based EG-FET sensors not only exhibited the advantages of easy fabrication, low cost, and reproducibility but also featured excellent transistor sensing properties depending on the monomer composition of the MIP films and the ZnO crystal structure at the extended gate. Therefore, these sensors hold great promise for the practical detection of PHT and the evaluation of its proper dosage in medical supplies.Data availabilityData cannot be shared for ethical/privacy reasons. The data underlying this article cannot be shared publicly due to the privacy of individuals that participated in the study. The data will be shared on reasonable request to the corresponding authors.ReferencesFisher RS, van Emde BW, Blume W, Elger C, Genton P, Lee P, Engel J Jr (2005) Epileptic seizures and epilepsy: definitions proposed by the International League Against Epilepsy (ILAE) and the International Bureau for Epilepsy (IBE). Epilepsia 46:470–472PubMedGoogle ScholarHughes DM, Bonnett LJ, Marson AG, García-Fiñana M (2019) Identifying patients who will not reachieve remission after breakthrough seizures. Epilepsia 60:774–782CASPubMedPubMed CentralGoogle ScholarLee-Lane E, Torabi F, Lacey A, Fonferko-Shadrach B, Harris D, Akbari A, Lyons RA, Rees MI, Sawhney I, Halcox J, Powell R, Pickrell WO (2021) Epilepsy, antiepileptic drugs, and the risk of major cardiovascular events. Epilepsia 62:1604–1616CASPubMedGoogle ScholarAlgahtani H, Shirah B, Alqahtani AJ, Al-Malki AQ (2020) Irreversible cerebellar atrophy as a complication of short-term phenytoin exposure: clinical improvement following discontinuation of the culprit. J Epilepsy Res 10:96–99PubMedPubMed CentralGoogle ScholarBagdy G, Kecskemeti V, Riba P, Jakus R (2007) Serotonin and epilepsy. J Neurochem 100:857–873CASPubMedGoogle ScholarZhang JY, Liu DH, Meng XY, Shi Y, Wang RY, Xiao DL, He H (2017) Solid phase extraction based on porous magnetic graphene oxide/-cyclodextrine composite coupled with high performance liquid chromatography for determination of antiepileptic drugs in plasma samples. J Chromatogr A 1524:49–56CASPubMedGoogle ScholarZhang RQ, Wang SM, Yang Y, Deng YL, Li D, Su P, Yang Y (2018) Modification of polydopamine-coated Fe3O4nanoparticles with multi-walled carbon nanotubes for magnetic-μ-dispersive solid-phase extraction of antiepileptic drugs in biological matrices. Anal Bioanal Chem 410:3779–3788CASPubMedGoogle ScholarAnilanmert B, Çavuş F, Narin I, Cengiz S, Sertler Ş, Özdemir AA, Açikkol M (2016) Simultaneous analysis method for GHB, ketamine, norketamine, phenobarbital, thiopental, zolpidem, zopiclone and phenytoin in urine, using C18 poroshell column. J Chromatogr B 1022:230–241CASGoogle ScholarQueiroz RHC, Bertucci C, Malfará WR, Dreossi SAC, Chaves AR, Valerio DAR, Queiroz MEC (2008) Quantification of carbamazepine, carbamazepine-10,11-epoxide, phenytoin and phenobarbital in plasma samples by stir bar-sorptive extraction and liquid chromatography. J Pharm Biomed Anal 48:428–434CASPubMedGoogle ScholarBereczki A, Tolokán A, Horvai G, Horváth V, Lanza F, Hall AJ, Sellergren B (2001) Determination of phenytoin in plasma by molecularly imprinted solid-phase extraction. J Chromatogr A 930:31–38CASPubMedGoogle ScholarAbdollahi E, Abdouss M, Mohammadi A (2016) Synthesis of a nano molecularly imprinted polymeric sorbent for solid phase extraction and determination of phenytoin in plasma, urine, and wastewater by HPLC. RSC Adv 6:39095–39105CASGoogle ScholarJia MT, Zhu YY, Guo D, Bi XG, Hou XH (2020) Surface molecularly imprinted polymer based on core-shell Fe3O4@MIL-101(Cr) for selective extraction of phenytoin sodium in plasma. Anal Chim Acta 1128:211–220CASPubMedGoogle ScholarAzizi A, Bottaro CS (2020) A critical review of molecularly imprinted polymers for the analysis of organic pollutants in environmental water samples. J Chromatogr A 1614:460603CASPubMedGoogle ScholarNdunda EN (2020) Molecularly imprinted polymers–a closer look at the control polymer used in determining the imprinting effect: A mini review. J Mol Recognit 33:e2855CASPubMedGoogle ScholarYang WYX, Ma YX, Sun H, Huang CX, Shen XT (2022) Molecularly imprinted polymers based optical fiber sensors: a review. Trends Anal Chem 152:116608CASGoogle ScholarCui BC, Liu P, Liu XJ, Liu SZ, Zhang ZH (2020) Molecularly imprinted polymers for electrochemical detection and analysis: progress and perspectives. J Mater Res Technol 9:12568–12584CASGoogle ScholarHerrera-Chacón A, Cetó X, del Valle M (2021) Molecularly imprinted polymers–towards electrochemical sensors and electronic tongues. Anal Bioanal Chem 413:6117–6140PubMedPubMed CentralGoogle ScholarDiltemiz SE, Keçili R, Ersöz A, Say R (2017) Molecular imprinting technology in quartz crystal microbalance (QCM) sensors. Sensors 17:454Google ScholarKaisti M (2017) Detection principles of biological and chemical FET sensors. Biosens Bioelectron 98:437–448CASPubMedGoogle ScholarSyu YC, Hsu WE, Lin CT (2018) Review−field-effect transistor biosensing: devices and clinical applications. ECS J Solid State Sci Technol 7:Q3196–Q3207CASGoogle ScholarLi H, Shi W, Song J, Jang HJ, Dailey J, Yu JS, Katz HE (2019) Chemical and biomolecule sensing with organic field-effect transistors. Chem Rev 119:3–35CASPubMedGoogle ScholarSurya SG, Raval HN, Ahmad R, Sonar P, Salama KN, Rao VR (2019) Organic field effect transistors (OFETs) in environmental sensing and health monitoring: a review. Trends Anal Chem 111:27–36CASGoogle ScholarTao T, Zhou Y, Ma M, He H, Gao N, Cai Z, Chang G, He Y (2021) Novel graphene electrochemical transistor with ZrO2/rGO nanocomposites functionalized gate electrode for ultrasensitive recognition of methyl parathion. Sens Actuators B Chem 328:128936CASGoogle ScholarGao N, Zhou R, Tu B, Tao T, Song Y, Cai Z, He H, Chang G, Wu Y, He Y (2023) Graphene electrochemical transistor incorporated with gel electrolyte for wearable and non-invasive glucose monitoring. Anal Chim Acta 1239:340719CASPubMedGoogle ScholarGao N, Pan J, Wang L, Cai Z, Chang G, Wu Y, He Y (2023) Novel graphene electrochemical transistors incorporating zirconia inorganic molecular imprinted layer: design, construction and application for highly sensitive and selective detection of acetaminophen. Anal Chim Acta 1269:341405CASPubMedGoogle ScholarPullano SA, Critello CD, Mahbub I, Tasneem NT, Shamsir S, Islam SK, Greco M, Fiorillo AS (2018) EGFET-based sensors for bioanalytical applications: a review. Sensors 18:4042PubMedPubMed CentralGoogle ScholarRao LJ, Wang P, Qian YP, Zhou GF, Nötzel R, (2020) Comparison of the extended gate field-effect transistor with direct potentiometric sensing for super-Nernstian InN/InGaN quantum dots. ACS Omega 5:32800–32805CASPubMedPubMed CentralGoogle ScholarNishitani S, Sakata T (2018) Potentiometric adsorption isotherm analysis of a molecularly imprinted polymer interface for small-biomolecule recognition. ACS Omega 3:5382–5389CASPubMedPubMed CentralGoogle ScholarYang HY, Nishitani S, Sakata T (2018) Potentiometric Langmuir isotherm analysis of histamine-selective molecularly imprinted polymer-based field-effect transistor. ECS J Solid State Sci Technol 7:Q3079–Q3082CASGoogle ScholarKajisa T, Sakata T (2018) Molecularly imprinted artificial biointerface for an enzyme-free glucose transistor. ACS Appl Mater Interfaces 10:34983–34990CASPubMedGoogle ScholarLiu KH, Lin HY, Thomas JL, Chen CY, Chen YT, Chen CY, Yang CH, Lee MH (2022) Sensing of C-reactive protein using an extended-gate field-effect transistor with a tungsten disulfide-doped peptide-imprinted conductive polymer coating. Biosensors 12:31CASPubMedPubMed CentralGoogle ScholarIskierko Z, Checinska A, Sharma PS, Golebiewska K, Noworyta K, Borowicz P, Fronc K, Bandi V, D’Souza F, Kutner W (2017) Molecularly imprinted polymer based extended-gate field-effect transistor chemosensors for phenylalanine enantioselective sensing. J Mater Chem C 5:969–977CASGoogle ScholarIskierko Z, Sosnowska M, Sharma PS, Benincori T, D’Souza F, Kaminska I, Fronc K, Noworyta K (2015) Extended-gate field-effect transistor (EG-FET) with molecularly imprinted polymer (MIP) film for selective inosine determination. Biosens Bioelectron 74:526–533CASPubMedGoogle ScholarIskierko Z, Sharma PS, Noworyta KR, Borowicz P, Cieplak M, Kutner W, Bossi AM (2019) Selective PQQPFPQQ gluten epitope chemical sensor with a molecularly imprinted polymer recognition unit and an extended-gate field-effect transistor transduction unit. Anal Chem 91:4537–4543CASPubMedGoogle ScholarIskierko Z, Sharma PS, Prochowicz D, Fronc K, D’Souza F, Toczydłowska D, Stefaniak F, Noworyta K (2016) Molecularly imprinted polymer (MIP) film with improved surface area developed by using metal−organic framework (MOF) for sensitive lipocalin (NGAL) determination. ACS Appl Mater Interfaces 8:19860–19865CASPubMedGoogle ScholarJiangfeng G, Zhaoming D, Qingping D, Yuan X, Weihua Z (2010) Controlled synthesis of ZnO nanostructures by electrodeposition method. J Nanomater 2010:1–6Google ScholarPatella B, Moukri N, Regalbuto G, Cipollina C, Pace E, Di Vincenzo S, Aiello G, O’Riordan A, Inguanta R (2022) Electrochemical synthesis of zinc oxide nanostructures on flexible substrate and application as an electrochemical immunoglobulin-G immunosensor. Materials 15:713CASPubMedPubMed CentralGoogle ScholarYang J, Wang YQ, Kong JH, Jia HX, Wang ZS (2015) Synthesis of ZnO nanosheets via electrodeposition method and their optical properties, growth mechanism. Opt Mater 46:179–185CASGoogle ScholarXu JQ, Xue ZG, Qin N, Cheng ZX, Xiang Q (2017) The crystal facet-dependent gas sensing properties of ZnO nanosheets: experimental and computational study. Sens Actuators B Chem 242:148–157CASGoogle ScholarSun JJ, Zhou DM, Fang HQ, Chen HY (1998) The electrochemical copolymerization of 3,4-dihydroxybenzoic acid and aniline at microdisk gold electrode and its amperometric determination for ascorbic acid. Talanta 45:851–856CASPubMedGoogle ScholarMarczewska B, Przegaliński M (2013) Poly(catechol) electroactive film and its electrochemical properties. Synth Met 182:33–39CASGoogle ScholarPourghobadi R, Nematollahi D, Baezzat MR, Alizadeh S, Goljani H (2020) Electropolymerization of catechol on wireless graphite electrode, unusual cathodic polycatechol formation. J Electroanal Chem 866:114180CASGoogle ScholarAyankojo AG, Boroznjak R, Reut J, Öpik A, Syritski V (2022) Molecularly imprinted polymer based electrochemical sensor for quantitative detection of SARS-CoV-2 spike protein. Sens Actuators B Chem 353:131160CASPubMedGoogle ScholarKhoubnasabjafari M, Salari R, Samadi A, Jouyban-Gharamaleki V, Jouyban A (2019) Colorimetric determination of phenytoin using indoxyl sulfate capped silver nanoparticles. Anal Methods 11:3324–3330CASGoogle ScholarHösli R, Tobler A, König S, Mühlebach S (2013) A quantitative phenytoin GC–MS method and its validation for samples from human ex situ brain microdialysis, blood and saliva using solid-phase extraction. J Anal Toxicol 37:102–109PubMedGoogle ScholarAbdollahi E, Khalafi-Nezhad A, Mohammadi A, Abdouss M, Salami-Kalajahi M (2018) Synthesis of new molecularly imprinted polymer via reversible addition fragmentation transfer polymerization as a drug delivery system. Polymer 143:245–257CASGoogle ScholarYen YK, Chiu CY (2020) A CMOS MEMS-based membrane-bridge nanomechanical sensor for small molecule detection. Sci Rep 10:2931CASPubMedPubMed CentralGoogle ScholarDownload referencesFundingThis study was supported by the Basic Science Research Program through the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF), funded by the Ministry of Education (NRF-2020R1I1A3070148) and the Ministry of Science and ICT (RS-2023–00240220).Author informationAuthors and AffiliationsDepartment of Polymer Science & Engineering, Kyungpook National University, 80 Daehak-Ro, Daegu, 41566, Republic of KoreaJin Chul Yang, Nari Shin, Seok Jin Lim, Deepshikha Hazarika & Jinyoung ParkDepartment of Food Science and Technology, and GreenTech-based Food Safety Research Group, BK21 Four, Chung-Ang University, Anseong, 17546, Republic of KoreaChae Hwan Cho & Jong Pil ParkAuthorsJin Chul YangView author publicationsYou can also search for this author inPubMedGoogle ScholarNari ShinView author publicationsYou can also search for this author inPubMedGoogle ScholarSeok Jin LimView author publicationsYou can also search for this author inPubMedGoogle ScholarChae Hwan ChoView author publicationsYou can also search for this author inPubMedGoogle ScholarDeepshikha HazarikaView author publicationsYou can also search for this author inPubMedGoogle ScholarJong Pil ParkView author publicationsYou can also search for this author inPubMedGoogle ScholarJinyoung ParkView author publicationsYou can also search for this author inPubMedGoogle ScholarCorresponding authorsCorrespondence toJong Pil ParkorJinyoung Park.Ethics declarationsEthical approvalThis work did not involve human or animal samples.Conflict of interestThe authors declare no competing interests.Additional informationPublisher's NoteSpringer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.Supplementary InformationBelow is the link to the electronic supplementary material.Supplementary file1 (DOCX 3505 KB)Rights and permissionsSpringer Nature or its licensor (e.g. a society or other partner) holds exclusive rights to this article under a publishing agreement with the author(s) or other rightsholder(s); author self-archiving of the accepted manuscript version of this article is solely governed by the terms of such publishing agreement and applicable law.Reprints and permissionsAbout this articleCite this articleYang, J.C., Shin, N., Lim, S.J.et al.Molecularly imprinted polymer-based extended-gate field-effect transistor chemosensors for selective determination of antiepileptic drug.Microchim Acta191, 400 (2024). https://doi.org/10.1007/s00604-024-06487-xDownload citationReceived:16 February 2024Accepted:04 June 2024Published:15 June 2024DOI:https://doi.org/10.1007/s00604-024-06487-xShare this articleAnyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:Get shareable linkSorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article.Copy to clipboardProvided by the Springer Nature SharedIt content-sharing initiativeKeywordsAntiepileptic drugMolecular imprintingExtended-gate field-effect transistorDrain currentZinc oxide patternImprinting factor