Improving pH sensitivity by field-induced charge regulation in flexible biopolymer electrolyte gated oxide transistors
Author links open overlay panel
Ning Liu
, 
Lu Gan
, 
Yu Liu
, 
Weijun Gui
, Wei Li, 
Xiaohang Zhang

Show more

Add to Mendeley

Share

Cite
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apsusc.2017.04.248
Get rights and content
Highlights
•
Chitosan-gated indium-zinc-oxide transistors were fabricated on flexible plastic substrate for pH sensing applications.
•
The gating effect of the chitosan-gated transistor was enhanced effectively by regulating the dynamic ion charging process.
•
The pH sensitivity of the chitosan-gated sensor was intrinsically improved by driving the ion transport with special gate potential profiles.
Abstract
Electrical manipulation of charged ions in electrolyte-gated transistors is crucial for enhancing the electric-double-layer (EDL) gating effect, thereby improving their sensing abilities. Here, indium-zinc-oxide (IZO) based thin-film-transistors (TFTs) are fabricated on flexible plastic substrate. Acid doped chitosan-based biopolymer electrolyte is used as the gate dielectric, exhibiting an extremely high EDL capacitance. By regulating the dynamic EDL charging process with special gate potential profiles, the EDL gating effect of the chitosan-gated TFT is enhanced, and then resulting in higher pH sensitivities. An extremely high sensitivity of ∼57.8 mV/pH close to Nernst limit is achieved when the gate bias of the TFT sensor sweeps at a rate of 10 mV/s. Additionally, an enhanced sensitivity of 2630% in terms of current variation with pH range from 11 to 3 is realized when the device is operated in the ion depletion mode with a negative gate bias of −0.7 V. Robust ionic modulation is demonstrated in such chitosan-gated sensors. Efficiently driving the charged ions in the chitosan-gated IZO-TFT provides a new route for ultrasensitive, low voltage, and low-cost biochemical sensing technologies.
Graphical abstract

Download: Download high-res image (111KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Previous article in issue
Next article in issue
Keywords
Oxide thin-film-transistorElectrolyte gatingChitosan filmCharge regulationpH sensing
1. Introduction
Precise control over transport, delivery and polarization of ions and molecules in field effect transistor (FET) configurations is of great significance in the fields of biosensing and bionics [1], [2], [3], [4]. As an ion modulating device, electrolyte-gated transistor (EGT) has attracted intense attention for biochemical sensing detections due to the huge ionic electric-double-layer (EDL) gate capacitance [5], [6], [7], [8]. In the EGT-based sensor, essentially speaking, trace amounts of charged species adsorbed on the sensing gate give rise to significant variations in channel current by the EDL gating effect. Due to the field-induced ion transport in the formation of EDL, the EDL gating effect is mostly governed by the dynamic interfacial charging process [9], [10]. Thus, efficiently driving the ion transport in EGTs with special gate potential profiles is meaningful for maximizing the function of EDL gating, which is expected to further improve the intrinsic sensitivity of the EGT sensors. So far, much effort has been devoted to the development of ultrasensitive biosensors based on EGT devices [11], [12]. In our previous studies, a type of oxide-based thin-film transistor (TFT) gated by inorganic solid electrolyte has been used as low-voltage biochemical sensors. Remarkable sensing abilities have been demonstrated on such EGTs with various architectures [13], [14]. However, the improvement of sensing abilities for the reported EGT sensors is mostly realized by the complicated surface engineering and device architecture innovation [15], [16]. The inherent influence of dynamic charge regulation at the electrolyte/channel interface on the sensing properties of EGT devices is still unexplored.
On the other hand, natural polymer materials, benefit from widely existing in the nature and low-cost volume fabrication, have received considerable interests in the development of new electronic materials. Chitosan is a biodegradable, biocompatible and nontoxic amine-riched polymer, which has been widely utilized in the fabrications of biomedical materials and electrochemical biosensors [17], [18]. Due to its high ionic conductivity resulting from the protonation of amines by acid doping, as illustrated in Fig. 1, chitosan film can also be employed as a solid electrolyte membrane [19], [20]. In addition, based on the superior film forming ability, chitosan film can be printed easily on flexible substrates, enabling irregular-shaped sensing applications.
Fig. 1
Download: Download high-res image (85KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 1. The mechanism of protonation/deprotonation process for chitosan.

In this work, solution-deposited chitosan films were used as dielectric in flexible indium-zinc-oxide (IZO)-based TFTs for pH sensing applications. The dynamic characteristics of EDL gating were studied by regulating the rate of the linear gate voltage ramps applied to the chitosan-gated IZO-TFTs. Much stronger gating effect was obtained for the chitosan-gated IZO-TFTs when the gate voltage swept at a low rate. An ultrahigh sensitivity of ∼57.8 mV/pH close to Nernst limit was achieved by sweeping the gate voltage at a rate of 10 mV/s. In addition, an enhanced EDL gating effect was observed when the chitosan-gated TFT sensor worked in the ion depletion mode, leading to an improved sensitivity of 2630% in terms of current variation from pH = 11 to pH = 3 with a negative gate bias of −0.7 V. Regulating the charged ions by gate electric field in such flexible chitosan-gated IZO-TFTs plays a crucial role in their applications of ultrasensitive, low-cost portable biochemical sensors.
2. Experimental
The chitosan-gated IZO-TFT sensors were fabricated on PET plastic substrates at room temperature, as schematically shown in Fig. 2a. First, 200 nm thick indium-tin-oxide (ITO) layer was deposited as bottom gate on the PET substrates by magnetron sputtering method, and then a sensing ITO area of 5.0 mm × 5.0 mm was shielded by an adhesive tape until the whole fabrication process was finished. Next, the chitosan solution (4 wt% in acetic acid) was directly drop-casted onto the ITO conductive PET substrate or silicon wafer and dried in air to form a film. Thirdly, patterned IZO channel layer with a thickness of ∼30 nm were deposited by magnetron sputtering method with the aid of a nickel shadow mask. Channel length (L) and width (W) is 80 μm and 1000 μm, respectively. The isolated IZO patterns were also deposited on chitosan film coated ITO conductive PET substrate to obtain an IZO/chitosan/ITO capacitor. Finally, Ni/Au (30/50 nm) stack films used as the source/drain electrodes were deposited by e-beam evaporation method through another nickel shadow mask. Fig. 1b shows the photo of the bent IZO-TFT arrays gated by the chitosan films on a PET substrate. The thickness and the cross-sectional profile of chitosan films were measured by a field-emission scanning electron microscope (SEM, Hitachi S-4800). Proton conductivities and frequency dependent capacitances of the chitosan films were characterized by a Solartron 1260A impedance analyzer. Transistor characteristics of the device were recorded by a semiconductor parameters characterization system (Keithley 4200 SCS) at room temperature. The dynamic responses of EDL gating based on field-induced ion transport were analyzed by sweeping the gate voltage at different rates. The pH sensing performances of the device were measured by the same system with a miniature Ag/AgCl reference electrode dipped into a 10 μL phosphate buffer solution droplet dropped on the sensing area. The pH buffer solution was prepared by titrating 0.01 M phosphate solution with dilute hydrochloric acid or potassium hydroxide solution. The pH value was monitored by a commercial pH meter. Electric measurements were performed in a dark box to prevent interference from the visible light.
Fig. 2
Download: Download high-res image (232KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 2. (a) Schematic image of the chitosan-gated IZO-based TFT pH sensor. (b) The picture of the sensor array fabricated on a flexible PET substrate.

3. Results and discussion
Fig. 3a shows the cross-sectional SEM image of the chitosan-based proton-conductive film on a Si (100) substrate. The thickness of chitosan film is estimated to be ∼7 μm. The inset in Fig. 3a shows the enlarged cross-sectional mircoscopy image. A loose microstructure with nanopores is observed. Proton conductivities (δ) of the chitosan films were measured with sandwiched IZO/chitosan/ITO structures, as shown in the inset of Fig. 3b. The impedance spectroscopy data are collected as real (Re Z′) and imaginary (Im Z″) components of the complex impedance. A typical Cole–Cole plot is observed in Fig. 3b. The impedance real value (R) where the impedance imaginary value is zero is used to obtain the δ value by using the following relation [21]:
(1)
where D, A and R0 are the thickness of the chitosan film, the electrode surface area and the resistance of electrode, respectively. In our case, the thickness D is ∼7 μm, A is ∼1.5 × 10−3 cm2 while R0 is measured to be ∼30 Ω. Thus, δ is estimated to be ∼2.8 × 10−3 S/cm, indicating that the chitosan film shows high proton conductivity at room temperature. The leakage current (IG) of the chitosan film was also measured, as shown in Fig. 3c. An ultralow IG below 3 nA for chitosan film is obtained with the bias voltage range from −1.5 V to 1.5 V. These results confirm that the as-prepared chitosan film is an electronically insulating but proton-conducting membrane.
Fig. 3
Download: Download high-res image (656KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 3. (a) The cross-sectional SEM image of the as-deposited chitosan films. Inset: the higher magnification SEM image. (b) Cole–Cole plots for the chitosan film. Inset: the sample structure. (c) Leakage curve of the chitosan film. (d) Frequency-dependent specific capacitance of the chitosan film. Inset: Schematic diagram of the test structure and the proton hopping mechanism under an applied electric field.

The specific capacitance-frequency curve for the IZO/chitosan/ITO capacitor is illustrated in Fig. 3d from 1 Hz to 1 MHz. The capacitance increases with decreasing frequency. A maximum specific capacitance (Ci) of 5.4 μF/cm2 is obtained at 1.0 Hz due to the formation of EDL at the interface between the chitosan film and the oxide electrode. Here, we should point out that the chitosan film can exhibit protonated electrolyte behavior due to the protonation of amino-group (−NH2 + H+ → −NH3+). When an extrinsic electric field is applied, some of the protonated amino group will be deprotonated. Then, the protons can move along the hydrated molecule via hydrogen-bond network hopping process following the Grotthuss mechanism [22], [23], diagramed as the sketch map in the inset of Fig. 3d. Finally, mobile protons will migrate in response to the applied electric field and accumulate at the chitosan/electrode interfaces to form EDL capacitors. While at the high-frequency region, the low ion mobility limits the interfacial ion polarization, and only a small number of protons can accumulate at the interface, leading to a low capacitance value. As fast-switching operations are unnecessary for sensing devices, the operation frequency of EDL formation in chitosan film is quite satisfied for biochemical sensing applications.
Fig. 4a shows the transfer characteristics of the flexible chitosan-gated IZO based TFTs at a constant VDS of 1.5 V recorded before and after repeated bending cycles. The gate bias (VGS) sweeps from −1.5 V to 1.5 V at a sweep rate of 50 mV/s. A typical n-type transistor operation is observed with electron accumulation at positive VG and electron depletion at negative VGS. The operation voltage of the device is as low as 1.5 V due to the huge EDL gate capacitance. Before bending treatment, the subthreshold swings (SS), drain current on/off ratio (Ion/Ioff) and threshold voltage (Vth) of the chitosan-gated TFTs are estimated to be 115 mV/decade, 5 × 106 and ∼0.2 V, respectively. The field-effect electron mobility (μFE) in the saturation region is estimated to be ∼10.3 cm2 V−1 s−1 using the following equation:
(2)
Fig. 4
Download: Download high-res image (607KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 4. (a) Transfer curves of the chitosan-gated IZO-TFT measured before and after repeated bending cycles at VDS = 1.5 V, while VGS sweeps from −1.5 V to 1.5 V at a sweep rate of 50 mV/s. (b) The variations in Vth and μFE of the flexible TFT with repetitive bending cycles. (c) Transfer curves of the chitosan-gated IZO-TFT measured at VDS = 0.1 V with a sweeping VGS at different rate. (d) The variations in Ion/Ioff and SS values of the chitosan-gated TFT with VGS sweep rate.

The flexible transistor survives after repeated flex/flat cycles with little changes in transfer characteristics. Fig. 4b illustrates the extracted electrical parameters for the flexible TFTs received bending cycles. After 1000 cycles of bending and recovery, a small positive shift of ∼30 mV in Vth and only ∼8% reduction in μFE are measured. These results indicate that the flexible chitosan-gated IZO-TFTs perform excellent transistor characteristics with robust mechanical reproducibility and durability.
To investigate the dynamic characteristics of EDL gating based on field-induced proton transport, the IDS − VGS curves of the chitosan-gated IZO-TFTs were measured at a fixed VDS of 0.1 V with different VGS sweep rates. As shown in Fig. 4c, when VGS sweeps from −1.5 V to +1.5 V and back, an anti-clockwise hysteresis window of transfer curve is observed. This hysteresis behavior is mainly due to the mobile protons in the chitosan dielectric. The hysteresis window essentially reflects the dynamic response of proton transport to the gate electric field. It can be confirmed by the fact that the hysteresis window decreases with decelerating VGS sweep rate. A smallest hysteresis of 0.5 V in width is measured at a VGS sweep rate of 10 mV/s, corresponding to the more completed proton polarization. Moreover, the variations in Ion/Ioff and SS with VGS sweep rates are extracted, as displayed in Fig. 4d. When the VGS sweep rate decelerates from 500 mV/s to 10 mV/s, gradual increasing Ion/Ioff and decreasing SS values are observed. These results suggest that the EDL gating effect of the chitosan-gated IZO-TFTs can be enhanced efficiently by decelerating the sweep rate of the gate voltage.
In the processes of pH sensing, the IZO carrier density of the flexible chitosan-gated TFT can be modulated when an electrolyte potential (VREF) is applied to the Ag/AgCl reference electrode. Fig. 5a shows the pH value dependent transfer curve shifts of the chitosan-gated TFT sensors operated in the linear region with a fixed VDS of 0.1 V. The VREF sweeps from −1 to 1.5 V at a rate of 100 mV/s. The value of Vth is calculated from the x-axis intercept of IDS versus VREF plot. It is observed that the Vth of chitosan-gated sensor shifts to the negative direction gradually when the pH value changes from 11 to 3. On the basis of site-binding theory and Gouy-Chapman-Stern model [24], [25], the Vth shift of FET-based sensor is resulted from a change in surface potential (φ0) at the interface between the solution and ion sensing membrane. In our case, an acidic solution will give rise to a more positive potential on the ITO gate electrode [26], which makes more mobile protons in the chitosan films move to the chitosan/IZO channel interface to form a large EDL capacitance. The extra protons will induce more imaged negative charge in the IZO channel due to the EDL gating, which results in a more negative Vth. In the case of alkali solutions, a more positive Vth can be observed. The variations in Vth with solution pH values are extracted, as plotted in the inset of Fig. 5a. A good linear relation is obtained between Vth and the pH value. The sensitivity and linearity of the chitosan-gated TFT sensor are 41 mV/pH and 0.998, respectively. Furthermore, the effect of VREF sweep rate on the sensing properties of chitosan-gated TFTs was also investigated. As shown in Fig. 5b, the pH sensitivities of chitosan-gated TFT sensors increase with the deceleration in VREF sweep rate. A high sensitivity of 57.8 ± 1.1 mV/pH close to the Nernst limit (59.2 mV/pH) is obtained at a VREF sweep rate of 10 mV/s. This behavior is mainly attributed to the more perfect EDL formed at the sensing gate interface with a lower VREF sweep rate, which is beneficial for the Nernstian pH response of the chitosan-gated TFT sensors.
Fig. 5
Download: Download high-res image (562KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 5. (a) Transfer curves of the chitosan-gated TFT sensor measured at VDS = 0.1 V by sweeping VREF at a rate of 100 mV/s with pH values changing from 11 to 3. The inset shows the sensitivity in terms of Vth shift. The data can be fitted linearly by the red line. (b) The variation in sensitivity of the chitosan-gate TFT sensor with the VREF sweep rate. The red dash line represents the Nernst limit of FET-based sensors. The error bars represent standard deviations for 5 samples. (c) The real-time responses of ΔI/IpH11 for chitosan-gated TFT sensor in each pH solution for 300 s at VDS = 0.1 V with different VREF (−0.7 V, 0 V, and 1 V). (d) The variations in sensitivity in terms of ΔI/IpH11 with different VREF. (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

The sensitivity S of a sensor can also be defined as the relative change in channel current, i.e., S = (|I − I0|)/(I0) = ΔI/I0 [27]. Fig. 5c records real-time responses in ΔI/I0 values at VDS = 0.1 V in various pH solutions for 300 s with different VREF (−0.7, 0, and 1 V). In our measurements, the initial response current to pH = 11 (IpH11) is defined as I0. At the same VREF, the ΔI/IpH11 value increases stepwise with discrete changes in pH value from 11 to 3. When a more negative VREF is applied, a much larger ΔI/IpH11 value at a certain pH value is obtained. The average values of ΔI/IpH11 at various pH values with different VREF are extracted, as shown in Fig. 5d. The ΔI/IpH11 value decreases linearly with the pH of solution at VREF = 1 V, and a low sensitivity of 21% is obtained in terms of ΔI/IpH11 at pH = 3. In contrast, there is a growing nonlinear pH dependent ΔI/IpH11 values as VREF becomes negative. ΔI/IpH11 approaches an exponential dependence on pH value at VREF = −0.7 V. A highest sensitivity of ∼2630% in terms of ΔI/IpH11 at pH = 3 is obtained at a fixed VREF of −0.7 V. This value is much higher than those reported in nanoscale transistor sensors [28], [29], [30]. The enhanced sensitivity in terms of current variation is mainly attributed to the most effective gating effect of charges bound on a surface in the ion depletion mode. Here, the EDL gating effect of the chitosan-gated IZO-TFT sensors under different electrolyte potentials can be discussed according to the results of VREF dependent ΔI/IpH11 values. When a positive VREF of 1 V is applied, the chitosan-gated IZO-TFT sensor works in the linear region. Hence, the relation between ΔI/I0 and the surface potential φ0 can be deduced as [31]:
(3)
where 
 is the trans-conductance of the chitosan-gated TFT, calculated to be ∼127 μS at VGS = 1 V according to the transfer curve measurement by sweeping VGS at a rate of 10 mV/s (shown in Fig. 4c). The channel current at pH = 11 (IpH11) is measured to be ∼50 μA at VDS = 0.1 V with a fixed VREF = 1 V. Herein, α is introduced as the gating coefficient of the sensors, defined as the ratio of gating efficiency between the chitosan-gated sensor and the original chitosan-gated TFT. Due to the additional capacitor of solution in series with the gate capacitor of chitosan in the chitosan-gated sensor, α is less than unity. Substituting Δφ0 = −57.8 mV/pH measured in Fig. 5b into Eq. (3), a fitted α of ∼0.19 is obtained with the data of ΔI/IpH11 measured at VREF = 1 V. In comparison, the chitosan-gated TFT sensor works in the subthreshold region with a negative VREF of −0.7 V. The relation between ΔI/I0 and φ0 in the subthreshold region is [31]:
(4)
where kB is the Boltzmann constant, T is the absolute temperature, q is the elementary charge, and γ defined as the ratio between the ideal subthreshold swing at room temperature (59.2 mV/decade) and the measured SS for FET devices. In our case, γ is estimated to be 0.59 with a SS value of 100 mV/decade for the chitosan-gated IZO-TFT. Similarly, fitting the data to Eq. (4) with Δφ0 = −57.8 mV/pH, we have α = 0.60, which is much larger than that estimated in the linear region. The results confirm that the EDL gating effect of the chitosan-gated IZO-TFT sensor can be dramatically enhanced by an appropriate negative bias applied on the sensing gate, resulting in an exponentially increased sensitivity in terms of current variation.
Fig. 6a shows the switching stabilities of the chitosan-gated IZO-TFT sensor at pH = 7 with a constant VDS of 0.1 V when VREF is programmed with continuous pulsed amplitude of −1.5 V/ + 1.5 V. The Ion/off ratio of ∼106 is maintained after 200 cycles of pulses. Fig. 6b shows the channel current drift characteristics of such sensing device measured in solutions of pH = 7 for 1600 s at a fixed VDS = 0.1 V. Little changes in IDS are observed both at “ON” state (VREF = 1.5 V) and at “OFF” state (VREF = −1 V). The result suggests that the chitosan-gated IZO-TFT is expected to exhibit an superior sensing stability with repetitive field-induced ionic modulations.
Fig. 6
Download: Download high-res image (274KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 6. (a) Reproducibility test driven by square-wave pulses of VREF = −1.5 V to 1.5 V applied to the solution of pH = 7 with VDS = 0.1 V. (b) On current (Ion) and off current (Ioff) measured versus time at VDS = 0.1 V in pH = 7 solution, when constant VREF of 1.5 V and −1 V is applied, respectively.

4. Conclusion
In summary, chitosan-gated IZO-based TFTs were fabricated on flexible PET substrates for pH sensing applications. Due to the strong EDL gating effect based on the mobile proton within the chitosan film, the IZO channel current would be modulated efficiently even though the device were subjected to repeated bending treatment. Owing to the enhancement of EDL gating effect, the pH sensitivity of such flexible chitosan-gated IZO-TFT increased with decelerating sweep rate of the gate voltage. An extremely high sensitivity of 57.8 mV/pH close to Nernst limit was achieved when the gate voltage swept at a rate of 10 mV/s. A much stronger EDL gating effect was also observed when the EDL TFT works in the ion depletion region, correspondingly an enhanced sensitivity of 2630% in terms of current variation was obtained from pH = 11 to pH = 3 with the application of a negative gate bias of −0.7 V. Excellent reproducibility and stability of the ionic modulation were also demonstrated in such chitosan-gated sensors. Consequently, regulating the charged ions by gate electric field is of significant importance for the intrinsic sensitivity improvement of the electrolyte-gated transistors.
