Adrián Tamayo

Institut de Science et d'Ingénierie Supramoléculaires, Université de Strasbourg & CNRS, 8 Allée Gaspard Monge, Strasbourg, 67000 France

Wojciech Danowski

Faculty of Chemistry, University of Warsaw, Warsaw, 02-093 Poland

Bin Han

Yeonsu Jeong

Corresponding Author

Paolo Samorì

E-mail:samori@unistra.fr

Give access

Share full-text access

Use the link below to share a full-text version of this article with your friends and colleagues.Learn more.

Share a link

The optically tuneable nature of hybrid organic/inorganic heterostructures tailored by interfacing photochromic molecules with 2D semiconductors (2DSs) can be exploited to endow multi-responsiveness to the exceptional physical properties of 2DSs. In this study, a spiropyran-molybdenum disulfide (MoS2) light-switchable bi-functional field-effect transistor is realized. The spiropyran-merocyanine reversible photo-isomerization has been employed to remotely control both the electron transport and wettability of the hybrid structure. This manipulation is instrumental for tuning the sensitivity in humidity sensing. The hybrid organic/inorganic heterostructure is subjected to humidity testing, demonstrating its ability to accurately monitor relative humidity (RH) across a range of 10%–75%. The electrical output shows good sensitivity of 1.0% · (%) RH−1. The light-controlled modulation of the sensitivity in chemical sensors can significantly improve their selectivity, versatility, and overall performance in chemical sensing.

The atomic thickness and the exceptional charge transport characteristics of 2D semiconductors (2DSs) render their electronic properties highly sensitive to environmental changes. As a result 2DSs are ideal platforms for development of high-performance devices for chemical sensing applications[1]and neuromorphic devices due to their multi-parametric electrical response which can be of paramount importance in the context of post-Moore electronic technologies.[2,3]2DSs are capable of responding to a large portfolio of external stimuli such as radiation,[4-9]humidity,[10-13]temperature,[14-16]pressure,[17]or the presence of pollutants.[18-22]However, the development of highly-sensitive and high-performance chemical sensors based on pristine 2DSs suffers from significant reliability issues associated with poor selectivity, low reversibility, and environmental instability.[23-27]

The adsorption of small functional molecules onto the surface of 2DSs allows to impart them specific new functions or enhance their inherent unique characteristics.[28-32]In particular, fabrication of the hybrid organic/2DSs van der Waals heterostructures has been shown to constitute an efficient method to achieve controlled doping or to endow 2DSs with stimuli-responsiveness to specific external inputs.[33-36]The widest portfolio of molecular functionalities that can be programmed via chemical synthesis provides tools for the decoration of 2DSs with receptors capable to specifically interact with the analyte of choice, thereby conferring high selectivity to the sensing event. Inspired by the 2D-2D van der Waals heterostructures, the generation of ultrathin and highly ordered molecular layers onto the basal plane of 2DSs enables the construction of hybrid organic–inorganic structures, thereby enhancing the functional complexity of materials. By mastering this strategy, using molecular switches as reconfigurable dopants, hybrid materials and electronic devices thereof capable of responding to a wide range of external inputs have been developed. This is particularly interesting for application in chemical sensing through the fabrication of devices possessing on-demand selectivity and sensitivity, upon using molecular switches whose different states exhibit a diverse affinity for the analyte of choice.[37-42]

The electronic characteristics of 2DSs can be modulated by interfacing them with organic photochromic molecules, such as diarylethene,[43,44]azobenzene,[38,45-48]or spiropyran.[41,49,50]Photochromic molecules can be reversibly toggled between at least two isomers when exposed to light at specific wavelengths in a process characterized by a high sensitivity to a narrow range of wavelengths, a fast response time and excellent reversibility. Among photochromic molecules, spiropyran (SP) undergoes reversible photochemical isomerization between a neutral form (SP) and a zwitterionic merocyanine (MC) form. The photo-isomerization of the neutral SP with ultraviolet (UV) light (λ = 365 nm) yielding the zwitterionic MC form is accompanied by a major enhancement in the intrinsic dipole moment (Figure1a).[51]It can be reconverted to SP either thermally or via irradiation with visible light (560 nm).[51,52]The reversible SP-to-MC isomerization in heterostructures based SP/2DSs has been used to control the charge transport through the 2DS.[41,49,50]The interfacing of the molecules with the 2DSs can be further adjusted through the chemical functionalization of the SP core with side-chains, to achieve an enhanced control over the molecular self-assembly behavior at surfaces and interfaces. Such functionalization also influences the interaction with the environment through specific non-covalent forces like electrostatic ones. In particular, the functionalization with organic moieties containing heteroatoms such as oxygen groups (hydroxyl, carboxyl, vinyl alcohol, ethylene glycol units, etc) can promote dipole–dipole interactions with water molecules in the atmosphere[53-55]while playing a key role in the molecular self-assembly.[56-58]Owing to these characteristics, the dressing of 2DS surfaces with functionalized spiropyran molecules represents a useful approach to confer them a reversible light-controlled wettability.[59,60]

In this paper, we demonstrate light-tuneable humidity sensing based on SP derivative/2DSs hybrid structures. We have focused our attention on 2D molybdenum disulfide (MoS2) in its 2H phase as prototypical n-type semiconductor possessing excellent mechanical and electrical properties that worsen upon adsorption of water molecules on its surface.[61,62]We show that the decoration of mechanically exfoliated MoS2with solution-processed spiropyrans functionalized with either ethylene glycol chains (EGO-SP) or alkyl chains (C13-SP) (Figure1a) is a viable strategy to tune the field-effect transistors (FETs) sensitivity to humidity changes by exploiting a subtle yet non-dynamic control over the interaction with the water molecules in the environment. Ethylene glycol chains, in particular, are often employed as functional groups to enhance the hygroscopic properties of materials.[13,63,64]In addition to the role of the side chains grafted onto the spiropyran core, the reversible photo-isomerization between the neutral spiropyran and the zwitterionic merocyanine was revealed to determine a major and dynamic change in the hydrophilicity of the hybrid structure, yielding a tuneable, that is, dynamic, sensitivity in humidity sensing. Our responsive MoS2FETs displayed a light-modulated increase in electron transport as evidenced by an enhancement in current exceeding 50% upon EGO-SP to EGO-MC photo-isomerization, yielding a sensitivity in humidity detection up to 1.0% · (%) RH−1.

1 mg·mL-1solutions of EGO-SP and C13-SP in toluene were spin-coated onto the chosen solid substrate, followed by a mild thermal annealing at 80 °C for 10 min, in order to trigger the complete thermalization to the spiropyran form and achieve the full evaporation of solvent molecules. The responsiveness of SP isomers supported onto quartz substrates to UV light exposure and thermal treatment was assessed spectroscopically. The UV–vis spectra of both systems, that is, EGO-SP (Figure1b,top) and C13-SP (Figure1b,bottom) evidence the existence of the ring-closed spiropyran isomer, before the UV irradiation, and the ring-open zwitterionic merocyanine form, after the UV irradiation. Making use of exposure to green light or thermal annealing at 80 °C, the back-isomerization was accomplished yielding the SP isomer, as evidenced by its characteristic band at 365 nm. Upon irradiation with UV light, an intense band emerges at 530 nm, being the hallmark of the MC isomer (violet).[65]Thermal treatment (at 80 °C) yielded an almost complete recovery of the initial SP spectrum. These data provide evidence for the facile and reversible isomerization of the spiropyran derivatives taking place in spin-coated films.

The changes in absorption at 550 nm during the EGO-SP to MC photo-switching and the subsequent relaxation on quartz substrate were monitored with UV–vis spectroscopy (FigureS1a,b, Supporting Information). The typical band of MC chromophores (550 nm) appeared after a few seconds of UV (365 nm) irradiation. The absorption at 550 nm continued to increase under UV irradiation until reaching a full photo-conversion after ca. 180–240 s of irradiation, which can be fitted with a simple monoexponential equation indicating first-order kinetics (FigureS1c, Supporting Information).

The MC isomer can revert to SP isomer through thermal treatment, or over time as evidenced by a decrease in absorbance at 550 nm. At room temperature, the photo-conversion from the MC to SP form occurred after more than 4 h indicating sufficient thermal stability of MC form for sensing experiments (see FigureS1a, Supporting Information). This process can be accelerated by thermal treatment at ca. 80 °C, with a fast photo-conversion occurring in less than 2 min (FigureS1d, Supporting Information).

In order to study the photo-conversion from the EGO-SP isomer to the EGO-MC, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) was carried out on films on quartz. FigureS2(Supporting Information) shows the binding energy of the N1s core level, which provides unambiguous identification of the isomer on the surface. The SP showed two characteristics N1s peaks, at 405.2 and 398.6 eV, corresponding to NO2and N─C, respectively. Following UV irradiation, a new peak appeared at 399.6 eV, which can be ascribed to the N═C moiety of the MC isomer. Upon thermal treatment, an almost complete recovery of the initial SP spectrum was observed. These data provide evidence that photo-isomerization takes place.

To minimize any interference of the interaction between water molecules and the hydrophilic SiOxsurface, the latter was passivated with 120 nm of a hydrophobic layer of divinyltetramethyl-disiloxanebis(benzocyclobutene) (BCB). The BCB is widely used to provide a high-quality hydroxyl-free interface that acting as electron traps at the 2D/dielectric interface, thereby enhancing the photoresponse and reducing substrate wettability.[38,66]The SP molecules were spun onto SiOxor BCB-coated SiOxsubstrates, and wettability changes upon irradiation with UV light were recorded. FigureS3(Supporting Information) shows that the isomerization from EGO-SP to EGO-MC is accompanied by a decrease in the measured contact angle (CA) by 12±2°and 11±1°, for films supported on SiOxand BCB/SiOx, respectively. Conversely, the C13-SP to C13-MC isomerization was characterized by a smaller reduction in the CA, amounting 5±2°and 6±1°, on SiOxand BCB/SiOx, respectively. Hence, the larger changes in wettability are observed when the spiropyran is functionalized with ethylene glycol chains.[59]

The influence of ethylene glycol and alkyl side-chain on the molecular self-assembly on 2DS surfaces was explored by Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM) by comparing the morphologies of the bare MoS2and SP molecules/MoS2hybrids. Figure1creveals that the surface of bare MoS2, with a thickness between 3 and 7 nm (FigureS4, Supporting Information), is extremely smooth as evidenced by its root-mean square roughness (RRMS) of 0.24±0.04 nm, as estimated on an image of 1 × 1 µm2. Conversely, the EGO-SP/MoS2(Figure1c) and C13-SP/MoS2(FigureS5a,b, Supporting Information) surfaces displayed completely different morphologies. In particular, EGO-SP/MoS2films exhibit an increased roughness, amounting to RRMS= 0.5±0.1 nm, and a lamellar morphology comprising tubular structures, with a width of 14.4±0.8 nm and a thickness of 0.4±0.2 nm, tightly packed onto the MoS2surface forming oriented domains with preferential direction along the hexagonal lattices of the MoS2(FigureS6, Supporting Information). On the other hand, the C13-SP/MoS2formed large ill-defined aggregates on top of the MoS2(FigureS5a, Supporting Information) with remarkably increased roughness (RRMS= 1.3±0.8 nm). The thicknesses of the films were estimated from topographical AFM profiles in areas in which the SP layers have been scratched from the SiOxclose to the MoS2flakes. They were found to amount to 2.7±0.3 nm and 8.8±0.9 nm for EGO-SP and C13-SP films, respectively (FigureS7, Supporting Information).

The surfaces of both samples have undergone remarkable modification when exposed to UV light. The lamellar morphology of EGO-SP has transformed into large amorphous aggregates of EGO-MC (Figure1c), with an enhanced surface roughness (RRMS= 1.1±0.5 nm). Similarly, the spatially extended crystals observed in C13-SP films rearranged into large amorphous drops of C13-MC (FigureS5c, Supporting Information) with a smaller roughness (RRMS= 4.1±0.9 nm). Upon thermal annealing at 80 °C of the EGO-MC, the film got smoother again, as evidenced by a roughness of (0.6±0.3 nm), and the lamellar structure typical of EGO-SP (FigureS8, Supporting Information) was recovered, confirming the reversible nature of the EGO-MC to EGO-SP back-isomerization in thin films.

The SP molecule/MoS2hybrid structures were investigated as an active layer in FETs, with the aim of exploring the influence of the SP derivative on the light-responsiveness of both the electronic properties and the device's humidity-response, especially in relation to SP/MC isomerization. The MoS2FETs were fabricated by photolithography and thermal evaporation of Cr/Au (3/60 nm) on top of the bare SiOxor BCB-coated SiOx. Finally, the SP molecules were spin-coated and thermally annealed at 80 °C for 10 min to promote the complete solvent evaporation and formation of the SP isomer. The transfer characteristics for all the devices are shown inFigures2a–dandS9(Supporting Information), and the parameters extracted are reported inTable1.

The devices based on bare MoS2(black line) supported on SiOx(FigureS9, Supporting Information) and BCB/SiOx(Figure2a,b) exhibited n-type behavior with threshold voltage values (VTH) close to zero and electron mobilities (µ) up to 14 cm2V−1s−1. Upon deposition of the EGO-SP (Figure2a,green line) and C13-SP (Figure2b,green line) on the MoS2/BCB/SiOx, the VTHdisplayed a small shift to negative values, indicating an electron doping effect due to the molecular adsorption.[26,41,67,68]Such shifts amount to −5 and −5 V for the EGO-SP on MoS2/BCB/SiOxand MoS2/SiOx, respectively, and −2 and −2 V for the C13-SP on MoS2/BCB/SiOxand MoS2/SiOx, respectively. It is noteworthy that the deposition of SP on MoS2/BCB/SiOxand MoS2/SiOxresults in a slight increase in electron mobility of 1.1 and 1.6 cm2V−1s−1for the EGO-SP, respectively, and 0.2 and 1.9 cm2V−1s−1for the C13-SP, respectively.

After the irradiation with a 365 nm light during 10 min with an intensity of 0.7 mW·cm−2, the MoS2transistor showed a significant improvement in the device performance. An increase of current in the transfer curves was observed over the entire range of the gate bias, and a further negative shift of the VTH. In particular, the EGO photo-conversion of SP deposited on MoS2/BCB/SiOxand MoS2/SiOxyielding EGO-MC was accompanied by a negative VTHshift of −9 and −9 V, and an increase in the electron mobility of 9.2 and 3.8 cm2V−1s−1, respectively. Conversely, the isomerization into C13-MC on MoS2/BCB/SiOxand MoS2/SiOxwere characterized by a negative VTHshift of −9 and −9 V, and mobility enhancement of 8.7 and 2.8 cm2V−1s−1, respectively. In terms of VTHshift, both SiOxand BCB/SiOxsupports shows same effect. Upon considering mobility, BCB maximizes the effect of SP molecules on MoS2.

Therefore, the electric fields emanated by the dipoles in the zwitterionic MC efficiently act as a local gate, by shifting the work function of MoS2, thus inducing a strong n-type doping effect.[41]As a result, the device field-effect electron mobility and the VTHwere found to be strongly dependent on the state adopted by the SP molecule. The strong dipolar nature of zwitterionic MC molecules on the surface of chemical vapour deposition (CVD) MoS2induces a reversible shift in the Fermi level (see FigureS10, Supporting Information), transitioning from 5.0 to 4.8 eV. This Fermi level shift was observable in devices as a notable n-type doping effect. The analysis of the data in Figure2c,d, and FigureS9(Supporting Information) made it possible to quantify the photo-modulation efficiencies (PMEs) and high thermo-recovered efficiencies (TREs) of the EGO-SP/MoS2and C13-SP/MoS2hybrid structures. EGO-SP/MoS2-based devices exhibited PME values of 27±3% and 53±5% on SiOxand BCB/SiOxsubstrates, respectively. Differently, C13-SP/MoS2-based devices showed PME values of 29±3% and 47±8%. The higher PME observed when using BCB/SiOxsubstrates can be attributed to the reduced density of traps at the MoS2/dielectric interface.[38]Furthermore, the thermal reversibility of SP molecules/MoS2heterostructure FET devices was estimated by monitoring the device response upon thermal annealing at 80 °C for 10 min. EGO-MC/MoS2-based devices exhibited TRE values of 99±2% and 92±6% on SiOxand BCB/SiOxsubstrates, respectively, while C13-SP/MoS2-based devices showed TRE values of 95±2% and 97±2% on SiOxand BCB/SiOx, respectively. The excellent TRE indicates that it is possible to perform cycles of photo-conversion without observing a significant photo-degradation of the switching capability. Moreover, the consistent and high PME offers insights into the reversibility of the hybrid structure. Although the PME and TRE associated with photo-switching of SP fluctuate, there was no evident degradation trend observed. The high stability in photo-switching has previously been observed in graphene and MoS2devices decorated with alkyl SP derivatives.[41]It should be noted that the photo-switching measurements were performed in a nitrogen filled glove-box to avoid any influence of H2O and O2in the environment which was previously observed when combining EGO-SP with polymeric semiconductors.[65]

Notably, both EGO-SP/MoS2and C13-SP/MoS2systems displayed strikingly similar photo-responsive properties, with robust thermal recovery which is independent on the substrate or side chain. After five cycles of photo-switching, neither EGO-SP/MoS2nor C13-SP/MoS2exhibited considerable photo-fatigue. The blank experiments carried out on bare MoS2devices revealed the absence of photo-response upon exposure to UV light or thermal treatment under inert atmosphere (FigureS11, Supporting Information). The increase of the current during the isomerization from SP to MC can be ascribed to enhancement in the molecular dipole moment of the isomer ruling the doping, which is in line with our previous report.[41]

In order to assess the potential of our SP derivative/MoS2hybrid structure based on FETs as humidity sensor, the performances of devices containing bare MoS2, EGO-SP/MoS2(Figure3; FigureS12, Supporting Information) and C13-SP/MoS2(FigureS13, Supporting Information) were analyzed at various relative humidity (RH) levels, by making use of a home-made humidity chamber. At each change in RH, the samples were equilibrated for 5 min. Previous studies on the effect of the increasing RH on the performance of MoS2transistors revealed a simultaneous decay of the current, increase of the hysteresis, and positive shift of the threshold voltage.[61,62,69]The humidity range was selected to minimize the influence of leakage current. SiOxis a hygroscopic material that exhibits a high humidity dependence as evidenced by an increase in leakage current with high moisture content reaching values up to 10–100 nA above 75–80% RH.[70]Therefore, measurements were carried out at RH up to 75%. The minimum RH reached was 10%, primarily attributable to difficulties to stabilizing RH levels below this threshold, and the time required for stabilization the RH.

Upon increasing the RH from 10 to 70–75%, our devices based on bare MoS2/SiOx(FigureS12a, Supporting Information) displayed a decay of ca. 37±4% of the initial current (at low humidity values), and a major positive shift of the VTHof 16±2 V. The comparison of the forward and reverse curves reveals the presence of hysteresis, and the trends observed on the VTHshifts are not easy to rationalize. Conversely, when a BCB layer was placed at the MoS2/SiOxinterface (Figure3a) significantly lower drops of the initial current were observed 30±9%, in the same humidity range, along with a lower VTHshift of 10±3 V. The coating of the SiOxwith BCB reduces the interference of the SiOxon the humidity sensing. As a result, the MoS2/BCB/SiOxdevices exhibited negligible hysteresis, which simplifies the analysis of the VTH.

The electrical responses of the FETs to changes in the RH in the range from 10 to 70–75% RH after the deposition of the EGO-SP and C13-SP onto MoS2/SiOxand MoS2/BCB/SiOxwere comparable to those observed for the bare MoS2based devices. The decay of the current on the EGO-SP/MoS2/SiOxand EGO-SP/MoS2/BCB/SiOxwere 35±3% and 38±2%, respectively. Conversely, for the C13-SP we observed a slightly lower decay of the current which amounted to 30±2% and 32±2% for C13-SP/MoS2/SiOxand C13-SP/MoS2/BCB/SiOx, respectively. In other words, the decoration of the MoS2surface with EGO-SP and C13-SP did not significantly modify its humidity sensitivity (Figure3b; FiguresS12bandS13a,b, Supporting Information), with the subtle changes observed in the humidity response being in accordance with the small deviations in the measured CA on CVD MoS2(FigureS14, Supporting Information) after the EGO-SP deposition. In particular, CA measurement of CVD MoS2indicated a hydrophobic nature of the surface (80.8°), in agreement with values reported in the literature.[71,72]Its functionalization with EGO-SP leads to a CA = 82.7°.

After the UV irradiation, the transistor exhibited a strong n-type doping. FigureS12c(Supporting Information) and Figure3cshow that the decay of the current in FET comprising EGO-MC/MoS2/SiOxand EGO-MC/MoS2/BCB/SiOxwhen increasing the RH from 10 to 70–75% amounts to as much as 61±4% and 59±3%, respectively. Such a high magnitude can be ascribed to the strong affinity of the hydrophilic EGO-MC for water molecules. The CA of the EGO-MC/CVD MoS2corresponds to 71.5°after the UV exposure and it was found to quickly decrease within the timescale of a few tens of seconds (FigureS14, Supporting Information), reaching 66.5°after 2 min. The swift decay in CAs can be attributed to the water adsorption phenomenon by the EGO-MC layer, contrasting the behavior typically observed in bare MoS2.[73]

Conversely, FigureS13c,d(Supporting Information) reveals that the photo-isomerization of C13-SP to form C13-MC is characterized by a lower decay of current of 38±5% and 34±2% when supported on MoS2/SiOxand MoS2/BCB/SiOx,respectively. Thus, the conversion of the EGO-SP to EGO-MC is accompanied by an enhancement in the sensitivity to RH changes, as a result of the zwitterionic nature of the molecule. Such a sensitivity is overall greater compared to C13-SP and C13-MC because of the enhanced hygroscopic character of the ethylene glycol versus alkyl side chain (Figure3d).

Figure3ereports the sensitivity (S) of the different humidity sensors based on MoS2and SP/MoS2transistors which has been quantified by estimating the slope of the current decrease in the RH range spanning from 10 to 75% (FigureS15, Supporting Information). It is worth noting that bare MoS2on SiOxand BCB/SiOxsubstrates exhibit differentS. The hygroscopic nature of the SiOxaffects the sensitivity to humidity changes: the use of SiOxsupports displayed the highest sensitivity (0.6% · (%) RH−1) compared to BCB/SiOx(0.5% · (%) RH−1). Nevertheless, the hydrophobic character of BCB was instrumental to provide a high-quality hydroxyl-free interface, limiting the water adsorption at the dielectric/MoS2interface and onto the channel MoS2thereby improving the device stability in air, as evidenced by the lowest hysteresis, and the easier processing of the data to develop the humidity sensor (Figure3a–c). Conversely, the MoS2/SiOxexhibited a major hysteresis (FigureS12, Supporting Information) due to the large density of interfacial traps.

Following, the RH sensitivity (Figure3e) of the MoS2was modulated via the physisorption of molecules possessing tuneable hydrophilic/hydrophobic properties. In particular, the gain in the sensitivity can be quantified by estimating the ratio between the sensitivities in two specific cases. For example, the increase in sensitivity upon isomerization of the SP to MC in EGO-SP corresponds to SMC/SSP, which amounts to 1.0/0.6 = 1.7 for the devices based on EGO-SP/MoS2on SiOxwhereas a value of 0.9/0.6 = 1.5 was determined when using BCB/SiOxas support. Conversely, SMC/SSPon the C13-SP/MoS2resulted in 0.55/0.47 = 1.2 and 0.56/0.47 = 1.2, for devices based on EGO-MC/MoS2on SiOxand BCB/SiOx, respectively. The big gain observed for the EGO-SP/EGO-MC is a result of joint effect of the ethylene glycol hydrophilic chains and strong change in dipole of the headgroup, both strongly interacting with water molecules. Conversely, the hydrophobic alkyl chains and the strong dipole of the C13-MC did not provide a similar strong enhancement in water adsorption. The Fourier transform infrared (FT-IR) measurements carried out under different humidity conditions provide strong evidence of the ability of EGO-SP and C13-SP to interact with water molecules. In particular, both EGO-SP and C13-SP showed a small absorption band ≈3500 cm−¹ due to water adsorption and hydrogen bonding (FigureS16). For the former molecule, after photo-isomerization to EGO-MC the intensity of this band increased significantly. The joint effect of the hydrophilic ethylene glycol and the major dipole change in the photoresponsive core of the molecule strongly modify the local wettability of the surface upon isomerization from EGO-SP to EGO-MC, enhancing water adsorption. These phenomena were not observed in the case of C13-SP (and C13-MC). In such a case the band ≈3500 cm⁻¹ was found to be little sensitive to the occurrence of the isomerization from SP to MC even at high humidity levels indicating that the observed increase in humidity sensitivity is solely due to the formation of a strong dipole upon isomerization of the molecular core into the zwitterionic merocyanine form. Finally, it is worth stressing that the gain on the sensitivity (SMC/SMoS2) of the EGO-MC produced by the decoration of the MoS2were 1.0/0.6 = 1.7 and 0.9/0.5 = 1.8 on the SiOxand BCB/SiOx,respectively.

Typically, humidity sensors based on MoS2transistor exhibit poor performance or unclear trends when exposed to humid air. By making use of simple passivation of the SiOx, our approach of SP/MoS2on BCB/SiOxovercomes key intrinsic bottlenecks of MoS2humidity sensors such as the uncontrolled hysteresis[74,75]and the narrow operational range of the humidity sensors based on MoS2transistor (10 to 40% RH).[61]By and large, the passivation of the SiOxis an attractive approach for the development of multifunctional sensors because it decouples the impact of silanols on the device response.

The light-induced photo-switching triggers a wettability change of the SP/MoS2interface, in turn, worsens the optoelectronic properties of the MoS2semiconductor due to water's known role as an electron trap in MoS2. There are examples in the literature where invasive external stimuli, such as strain, have been shown to affect the sensitivity to humidity changes in FETs based on MoS2monolayer.[76]However, our approach has the advantage of relying on non-invasive inputs enhancing the humidity sensitivity of MoS2transistors.

The reversible nature of water adsorption onto the MoS2surface was assessed upon successive device exposure to humid and dry air. It was found that the initial performance of the MoS2devices could be partially restored after 1 h of flushing a gentle stream of N2to remove the water (FigureS17, Supporting Information), recovering 96.3% and 99.8% of the initial current, for the MoS2/SiOxand MoS2/BCB/SiOx, respectively.

Finally, in order to evaluate the effect of the thermal back-isomerization from MC to SP occurring at room temperature on the sensitivity in humidity sensing, we investigated the characteristics of our devices over the time scale of a few hours when exposed to low humidity (<5% RH) (FigureS18, Supporting Information). The bare MoS2and EGO-SP/MoS2exhibited stable device outputs over time. In contrast, EGO-MC/MoS2transistors displayed a slight drop in current (<5%) after 2 h of exposure to dry air, as a result of the back-isomerization from the MC to SP isomer occurring at room temperature. Such result is a strong confirmation that the response to humidity changes we have reported above is due to the adsorption of water molecules onto the channel material, whereas the impact of the exposure to oxygen on the device stability was negligible over the short time frame of a few hours.

In summary, we developed an optically switchable MoS2humidity sensor by dressing 2DS flakes with a light-responsive spiropyran ultrathin layer. Upon optimizing the hydrophobic nature of the support and the hydrophilic character of the spiropyran derivative, high sensitivity in the sensing events could be attained, reaching values of 0.5% · (%) RH−1for the bare MoS2and 0.5% · (%) RH−1for the bare EGO-SP/MoS2. Such a sensitivity can be further boosted to 0.9% · (%) RH−1upon triggering the photo-isomerization from SP to MC, thereby enhancing further the hydrophilicity of the surface.

The demonstration of multi-responsive sensing capability of organic/2D semiconductor hybrids structure is a milestone toward the development of an unprecedented class of reconfigurable chemical sensors combining high sensitivity and selectivity with tuneable performance.

The MoS2bulk crystal semiconductors were purchased from SPI. The CVD few layers MoS2continuous films on SiOxwere purchased from 6 Carbon. The BCB polymer, divinyltetramethyl-isiloxanebis(benzocyclobutene), was purchased from Dow Chemical (CYCLOTENE) and diluted with mesitylene solution (1:4 volume ratio). The anhydrous toluene, methylene, ethanol, isopropanol and acetone were purchased from Sigma–Aldrich. EGO-SP and C13-SP were synthesized according to previous studies, with some modifications.[65]The 270-nm thermally oxidized silicon wafers were purchased from Fraunhofer Institute IPMS (n-doped Si).

MoS2flakes were mechanically exfoliated from a bulk crystal using blue Scotch tape (purchased from Nitto), and then a polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) film (purchased from Gel-Pak) was used to transfer the MoS2flakes from the Scotch tape on SiOxsubstrates or BCB/SiOxsubstrates. The BCB/SiOxwas prepared following the protocol reported by the Y. Zhao et al.[38]120 nm of BCB polymer was spin-coated onto the SiOxand cross-linked by post-annealing at 290 °C (10 min inside the glovebox).

The top-contact source and drain electrodes were manufactured by photolithography and a Cr (3 nm) and Au (60 nm) layer were deposited by thermal evaporation. Then, the substrates were cleaned with acetone and isopropanol and then dried under nitrogen flow. Finally, the MoS2transistors were annealed at 140 °C for 8 h in a high-vacuum chamber to improve the contacts and remove adsorbents, such as water or organic solvents.

In order to fabricate the SP/MoS2heterojunction, a thin layer of EGO-SP (or C13-SP) was spin-coated (1200 rpm for 60 s) onto the MoS2FET. Subsequently, a thermal treatment to remove the solvent residue was carried out at 80 °C for 10 min. All the devices were kept in a nitrogen-filled glovebox during the processing and annealing of the SP/MoS2heterojunction.

UV–vis absorption spectra and isomerization kinetics of the SP molecule on quartz substrates were recorded at room temperature with a JASCO V650 spectrophotometer. Fourier transform infrared (FT-IR) spectra of the SP molecule on quartz substrates were recorded using a FT-IR 4700 Fourier Transform Infrared Spectrometer (JASCO) equipped with ATR Diamond. The CA measurements were conducted using a Krüss DSA 100 instrument. A 4 µL droplet of Milli-Q water was deposited onto SiOxand BCB/SiOxsubstrates before and after printing the SP molecules, as well as after UV treatment of the SP molecules on SiOxand BCB/SiOxsubstrates.

The AFM measurements were carried out using a Bruker Dimension Icon microscope in ambient conditions, operating in tapping mode and using TESPA-V2 tips with spring constant k = 42 N·m−1.

All light-induced photo-switching characterizations were conducted according to the following protocol: Quartz substrates were irradiated vertically with a UV light source (365 nm), emitting 0.7 mW·cm−2for 10 min, using a Polychrome V monochromator (Till Photonics). To recover the SP form, the heating process was carried out using a hot plate set at 80 °C for 10 min.

The bottom-gate top-contact devices were electrically characterized by a Keithley dual-channel 2636 A source meter in a three-terminal configuration.

For light-induced photo-switching, a Polychrome V monochromator (Till Photonics) irradiated vertically the FETs with a UV light source (365 nm) emitting 0.7 mW·cm−2for 10 min. The heating was performed using a hot plate set at 80 °C for 10 min. The experiments were carried out inside the glove box to mitigate the effects of atmospheric humidity.

The heterostructure device's response to changes in the RH was studied in a home-made humidity chamber including commercial sensors (SHT31 Smart Gadget) for monitoring/controlling humidity and temperature, and equipped with a commercial humidifier. The heterostructure devices were fixed on PCB board, and connected with 80 µm thick gold wires.

The authors acknowledge funding from the European Commission through the ERC project SUPRA2DMAT (GA-833707) and the HORIZON-CL4-2023-DIGITAL-EMERGING-01-CNECT project 2D-PRINTABLE (GA-101135196) as well as the Agence Nationale de la Recherche through the Interdisciplinary Thematic Institute SysChem via the IdEx Unistra (ANR-10-IDEX-0002) within the program Investissement d'Avenir, the Foundation Jean-Marie Lehn and the Institut Universitaire de France (IUF). W.D. acknowledges the European Union's Horizon 2020 research and innovation program under the Marie Skłodowska-Curie Actions LAD2DCOFS (GA-101027639) and Polish National Agency for Academic Exchange (Reg. No.: BPN/PPO/2023/1/00014) and National Science Center Poland (Reg. No.: 2024/03/1/ST5/00003) for financial support. This work was also supported by National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) grant funded by Korea government (MSIT) (No. RS-2023-00251360). The authors thank Dr. F. Urban for her contributions and discussions regarding results.

The authors declare no conflict of interest.

A.T. and P.S. conceived the experiments and designed the study. A.T. performed all optoelectrical, AFM measurement, and UV–vis characterization. W.D performed the synthesis of the SP derivatives. Y.J. performed the Raman measurement and helped with the devices characterization. A.T and B.H. performed the CA measurement. B.H. helped with the fabrication of the devices. All authors discussed the results and contributed to the interpretation of data. A.T. and P.S. co-wrote the paper with input from all co-authors.

The data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request.

Please note: The publisher is not responsible for the content or functionality of any supporting information supplied by the authors. Any queries (other than missing content) should be directed to the corresponding author for the article.

Early View

Online Version of Record before inclusion in an issue

2404633

Copyright © 1999-2025John Wiley & Sons, Incor related companies. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence technologies or similar technologies.

Your password has been changed

Enter your email address below.

Please check your email for instructions on resetting your password.
                    If you do not receive an email within 10 minutes, your email address may not be registered,
                    and you may need to create a new Wiley Online Library account.

Can't sign in? Forgot your username?

Enter your email address below and we will send you your username

If the address matches an existing account you will receive an email with instructions to retrieve your username

The full text of this article hosted at iucr.org is unavailable due to technical difficulties.