Fig. 1. A schematic of the designed graphene FET. SU-8 narrow walls with top metal electrodes that were located on a substrate were pressed onto another silicon/SiO2substrate with predeposited graphene pieces. The SU-8 microchannels served as gas flow passages that helped the ethanol vapor come in contact with the sensitive region: the graphene channel.

Fig. 2. A fabrication flow chart for the 3D graphene FET array. (a) The SU-8 3D interdigital structure configuration was formed on a well-cleaned glass or silicon/SiO2substrate using negative lithography. (b) The SU-8 interdigital structure substrate was coated with UV photoresist, and the top of the interdigital narrow walls was exposed after positive lithography. (c) Two films, 10 nm-thick titanium (Ti) and 100 nm-thick platinum (Pt) films, were sequentially deposited on the wafer by magnetron sputtering deposition. (d) A lift-off process was carried out to form Pt/Ti electrodes on top of the SU-8 narrow walls. (e) The chemically reduced graphene pieces printed on the highly doped silicon/SiO2substrate was the back gate. (f) The two parts from (e) and (d) were combined together to form 3D graphene FETs.

Fig. 3. A TEM image of the graphene pieces chemically reduced from graphite oxide. (b) A zoomed-in image of the edge of the graphene piece in (a).

Fig. 4. The interdigital structure design of the SU-8 narrow walls. (a) The type I structure overlap of 50%, and (b) the type II structure overlap of 100%.

Fig. 5. (a and b) Optical images of the SU-8 interdigital structure for the type I and type II structures, respectively.Inset: Surface Profiler image showing the height of the narrow walls. (c and d) Optical images of the SU-8 patterns covered with UV photoresist and the top of the narrow walls without UV photoresist, respectively.

Fig. 6. An optical image of the 3D electrode. (a) The type I and (b) the type II structure, respectively.Inset: An SEM image showing the 3D structure of the microchannel. The height of the eventual SU-8 narrow walls was approximately 8.8 μm, and the thickness of the Pt electrode films was approximately 100 nm.

Fig. 7. TheVDS–IDScurves of the graphene channel from the FET with 3D narrow walls. The graphene channel obviously controlled theIDScurrent.

Fig. 8. The time response of theIDScurrent to a sequence of different ethanol gas injection times. (a) The sample from the type I structure, and (b) the sample from the type II structure.

This problem was overcome after the discovery of graphene that is 2D structure of one atomic thick carbon atom having all the interesting properties of CNT. Very recently graphene attracted the attention of chemical sensor researchers owing to some of its astonishing advantageous properties [80–130], some of which are: The final objective of a dream gas/vapor sensor should be the detection of a species with a sensitivity level down to a single atom or molecule.

Cookies are used by this site.Cookie Settings

All content on this site: Copyright ©2025or its licensors and contributors. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. For all open access content, the relevant licensing terms apply.

These cookies are necessary for the website to function and cannot be switched off in our systems. They are usually only set in response to actions made by you which amount to a request for services, such as setting your privacy preferences, logging in or filling in forms. You can set your browser to block or alert you about these cookies, but some parts of the site will not then work. These cookies do not store any personally identifiable information.

These cookies enable the website to provide enhanced functionality and personalisation. They may be set by us or by third party providers whose services we have added to our pages. If you do not allow these cookies then some or all of these services may not function properly.

These cookies allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors move around the site.

These cookies may be set through our site by our advertising partners. They may be used by those companies to build a profile of your interests and show you relevant adverts on other sites. If you do not allow these cookies, you will experience less targeted advertising.

Outline

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apsusc.2011.05.101Get rights and content

Full text access

A new approach to the fabrication of back-gated graphene FET (field effect transistor) arrays on microchannels was investigated. Narrow walls fabricated on a substrate with SU-8 (a negative photoresist), with top metal electrodes were pressed onto another silicon/SiO2substrate with predeposited graphene pieces such that the electrodes came into contact with graphene pieces and formed the source and drain contact. The SU-8 narrow walls with the top metal layer were fabricated by the conventional lift-off process. The graphene pieces were reduced chemically from graphite oxide. TheIDSchanged immediately by more than 17% when the device was exposed to an ethanol atmosphere. The current recovered very well after the ethanol gas was pumped out. The SU-8 microchannels served as gas flow passages that helped the ethanol vapor reach the sensitive region of the device: the graphene channel. This work provides a convenient way of constructing back-gated graphene FETs for sensing applications. This method could potentially be scaled up for mass production.

► Fabrication of back-gated graphene FET arrays on microchannels was investigated. ► The IDS changed immediately by more than 17% when the device was exposed to an ethanol atmosphere. ► The SU-8 microchannels served as gas flow passages that helped the ethanol vapor reach the sensitive region. ► This work provides a convenient way of constructing back-gated graphene FETs for sensing applications.

Since its experimental isolation in 2004, graphene has attracted a considerable amount of attention[1],[2],[3]. Its electronic properties, including its high charge carrier concentrations and mobilities, make it a promising candidate material for next-generation nanoelectronic devices[4],[5],[6]. So far, limited by the size of the graphene samples and the structure of the tested devices, most graphene devices reported in the literature have been prepared by e-beam lithography[7]. Expensive and multiple steps are required to pattern a device[8], including coating with photoresist, which may subject the graphene to possible contamination and increase the chance of device defects.

Here, we report a technique for constructing graphene FETs (field effect transistor) with a 3D interdigital structure. A schematic of the designed graphene FET is illustrated inFig. 1. The FET consists of two parts: the source and drain electrodes and the back gate. The source and drain electrodes are deposited on top of SU-8 (a negative photoresist) narrow walls, which were pre-prepared on a separate wafer. A highly doped silicon wafer with a SiO2surface layer served as the back gate, and chemically reduced graphene pieces were deposited on this silicon/SiO2substrate. The 3D graphene FETs were constructed by simply bonding the substrate with the electrodes and another silicon/SiO2substrate with graphene pieces together tightly. This technique is simple, inexpensive, and does not require any transfer processing, which greatly increases device throughput. The most important benefit is that the contaminants can be reduced because the graphene material is not directly exposed to the lithography process.Download:Download full-size imageFig. 1. A schematic of the designed graphene FET. SU-8 narrow walls with top metal electrodes that were located on a substrate were pressed onto another silicon/SiO2substrate with predeposited graphene pieces. The SU-8 microchannels served as gas flow passages that helped the ethanol vapor come in contact with the sensitive region: the graphene channel.

To construct a 3D graphene FET array, the electrode plate and the back gate plate were prepared separately and then bonded together with a bonding device.Fig. 2shows the fabrication flow chart of the 3D graphene FET array. The back gate plate was prepared by printing graphene pieces onto a highly doped silicon/SiO2substrate (Fig. 2(e)).Fig. 3shows a TEM image of graphene pieces that have been chemically reduced from graphite oxide. The electrode plate was prepared by constructing SU-8 narrow walls with a top metal layer on a glass or silicon/SiO2substrate using the conventional lift-off process. We have designed two interdigital patterns, namely, type I with 50% overlap and type II with 100% overlap, for the SU-8 narrow walls and electrodes on top of them, as shown inFig. 4. The electrode plate is the key component, and its fabrication process is described in detail in the following paragraphs.Download:Download full-size imageFig. 2. A fabrication flow chart for the 3D graphene FET array. (a) The SU-8 3D interdigital structure configuration was formed on a well-cleaned glass or silicon/SiO2substrate using negative lithography. (b) The SU-8 interdigital structure substrate was coated with UV photoresist, and the top of the interdigital narrow walls was exposed after positive lithography. (c) Two films, 10 nm-thick titanium (Ti) and 100 nm-thick platinum (Pt) films, were sequentially deposited on the wafer by magnetron sputtering deposition. (d) A lift-off process was carried out to form Pt/Ti electrodes on top of the SU-8 narrow walls. (e) The chemically reduced graphene pieces printed on the highly doped silicon/SiO2substrate was the back gate. (f) The two parts from (e) and (d) were combined together to form 3D graphene FETs.Download:Download full-size imageFig. 3. A TEM image of the graphene pieces chemically reduced from graphite oxide. (b) A zoomed-in image of the edge of the graphene piece in (a).Download:Download full-size imageFig. 4. The interdigital structure design of the SU-8 narrow walls. (a) The type I structure overlap of 50%, and (b) the type II structure overlap of 100%.

First, an SU-8 3D interdigital structure configuration was formed on a well-cleaned glass or silicon/SiO2substrate using negative lithography (Fig. 2(a)). The substrate was cleaned in acetone, alcohol, and deionized water for 15 min with ultrasonication. A typical SU-8 coating process was used: the substrate was rotated at 500 rpm for 10 s to allow the resist to cover the whole substrate, and it was then accelerated to 1500 rpm for 60 s to obtain better film uniformity and the ideal thickness. The final thickness of SU-8 film was approximately 8.9 μm. To densify the film and improve the adhesion between the SU-8 film and the substrate, a soft baking process with a prebaking step was performed at 65 °C for 5 min on a hot plate, and then the sample was rapidly warmed to 95 °C for 15 min. The SU-8 interdigital structure formed by negative lithography is shown inFig. 5(a) and (b).Download:Download full-size imageFig. 5. (a and b) Optical images of the SU-8 interdigital structure for the type I and type II structures, respectively.Inset: Surface Profiler image showing the height of the narrow walls. (c and d) Optical images of the SU-8 patterns covered with UV photoresist and the top of the narrow walls without UV photoresist, respectively.

Second, the substrate of the SU-8 interdigital structure was coated with UV photoresist, and the top of the interdigital narrow walls was exposed after positive lithography, as shown inFig. 2(b). This standard positive lithography was used to locate metal on the SU-8 patterns and form the metal patterns. Alignment is the most critical step in positive lithography; both negative and positive resists with totally different characteristics were used in the alignment. After the alignment process, only the area on the top of the SU-8 narrow walls could be exposed to UV. The photoresist was eventually removed. Meanwhile, the remaining parts protected the surface of the substrate and served as a sacrificial layer in the lift-off process. The SU-8 patterns after the positive lithography step are shown inFig. 5(c) and (d).

Next, 10 nm-thick titanium (Ti) and 100 nm-thick platinum (Pt) films were sequentially deposited on the wafer by magnetron sputtering deposition (Fig. 2(c)). The pattern of the Pt/Ti electrode was defined by the photolithography process. The purities of the Ti and Pt sputtering sources were 99.99%, and the sputtering gas (Ar) had a purity of 99.999%. The sputtering gas was introduced to the reactor at a flow rate of 20 sccm and a pressure of 5.0 × 10−3Torr. The sputtering power was kept at 150 W, and the sputtering times for Ti and Pt were 1 min and 3 min, respectively. The first layer, Ti, was used to improve the film attachment; the second layer, Pt, served as the main conductive layer.

Finally, a lift-off process was carried out to form Pt/Ti electrodes on top of the SU-8 narrow walls (Fig. 2(d)).Fig. 6shows the 3D electrodes and the microchannel. The height of the final SU-8 narrow walls was approximately 8.8 μm, and the thickness of the Pt electrode films was approximately 100 nm.Download:Download full-size imageFig. 6. An optical image of the 3D electrode. (a) The type I and (b) the type II structure, respectively.Inset: An SEM image showing the 3D structure of the microchannel. The height of the eventual SU-8 narrow walls was approximately 8.8 μm, and the thickness of the Pt electrode films was approximately 100 nm.

When the electrode plate and the back gate plate were ready, they were bonded together as shown inFig. 2(f); the sensing experiment could then be carried out. The experimental system is shown inFig. 1. The space between the electrode plate and the back gate plate offers the possibility of establishing better contact between the graphene material and the metal electrodes and provides a flow channel for gas sensing. The voltage and the current between the source and the drain areVDSandIDS, respectively. The voltage and the current between the gate and the source areVGSandIGS, respectively. To guarantee proper contact between the graphene material and the metal, the relative position of the electrode plate and the back gate plate were adjusted until an apparent current signal was obtained.

Fig. 7showsVDS–IDScurves at different gate voltages. These curves include a clear linear region and a saturation region, which is typical behavior of a graphene FET. In the linear region from 18 to 39 V, the currentIDSchanges with bothVDSand gate voltage, but in the saturated region higher than 40 V, the current changes only with the gate voltage.Download:Download full-size imageFig. 7. TheVDS–IDScurves of the graphene channel from the FET with 3D narrow walls. The graphene channel obviously controlled theIDScurrent.

To study the response of the device upon exposure to ethanol gas,IDS–tcurves resulting from the introduction of ethanol were recorded, as shown inFig. 8. TheIDSsignificantly changed as ethanol was injected and then pumped out. TheIDSshowed changes of approximately 17.4% and 16.5% for the type I and type II samples, respectively. The type I sample recovered very well to its initial value after the ethanol vapor was pumped out, while the type II sample recovered to a value slightly different from its initial value. The two samples have the same sensing area. In summary, the type I sample performed better, with a higher sensitivity and a better recovery.Download:Download full-size imageFig. 8. The time response of theIDScurrent to a sequence of different ethanol gas injection times. (a) The sample from the type I structure, and (b) the sample from the type II structure.

The ethanol gas molecules adsorbed on graphene decreased the conductivity of the graphene. TheIDSshowed an immediately change of approximately 17% when the device was exposed to an ethanol atmosphere. It recovered very well after the ethanol gas was pumped out. In the first five minutes, theIDScurrent decreased to a minimum value of approximately 38 μA and then maintained this value. TheIDScurrent recovered to its initial value (46 μA) within several minutes as the ethanol was removed. The SU-8 microchannels served as gas flow passages that helped the ethanol vapor reach the sensitive region of the device: the graphene channel.

A back-gated graphene FET array on microchannels was successfully constructed by simply bonding two parts, the electrode plate and the back-gate plate, together. The SU-8 narrow wall formed gas flow channels between the source and the drain electrodes. Electrodes were deposited on the top of the SU-8 narrow wall by the lift-off process. Chemically reduced graphene pieces were transferred onto a silicon/SiO2substrate, which served as the back gate. TheIDSof the FET immediately changed by 17%, from 48 μA to 36 μA, in response to the exposure of the device to ethanol gas, and it recovered well after the ethanol was pumped out. Bringing the source and drain electrodes into contact with graphene pieces on a separate substrate using a mechanical approach avoided the need for an in situ lithography process. This method provides flexibility for device design and avoids graphene contamination during in situ lithography.

This paper was supported by theNational Natural Science Foundation of China(No.729092923040,50975226), theNational Basic Research Program of China(No.2009CB724202), theNew Century Excellent Talents(NCET-08-0447), and theFundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities.

Recent developments on graphene and graphene oxide based solid state gas sensors2012, Sensors and Actuators, B: ChemicalCitation Excerpt :This problem was overcome after the discovery of graphene that is 2D structure of one atomic thick carbon atom having all the interesting properties of CNT. Very recently graphene attracted the attention of chemical sensor researchers owing to some of its astonishing advantageous properties [80–130], some of which are: The final objective of a dream gas/vapor sensor should be the detection of a species with a sensitivity level down to a single atom or molecule.Show abstractGraphene, a monolayer of graphite sheet consisting of sp2 hybridized carbon atoms covalently bonded to three other atoms (discovered in 2004), has recently attracted the attention of chemical sensor researchers owing to its unprecedented structural, mechanical and electrical properties. Excellent mechanical strength (Young modulus ∼0.05 TPa), potentiality of ultrafast electron transport (highest mobility ∼200,000 cm2/V s) along with the best surface to volume ratio has opened up the opportunity to use the material for future gas and vapor sensors with ultra fast speed and long-term durability. Since it is a two dimensional material, every atom of graphene may be considered a surface atom and as a result every atom site may be involved in the gas interactions. This feature of graphene can eventually be responsible for its ultra sensitive sensor response with the lowest detection capability approaching even a single molecule. Further, the ease of functionalization of the material either by chemical means (absorption of many molecules like oxygen or hydrogen) or by application of voltage or pressure, facilitates bandgap-engineering which in turn may lead to a possible solution to the selectivity issues, the perennial problems of chemical sensors. In this review, the latest advancement and new perspectives of graphene based gas and vapor sensors have been discussed critically.Electrically-transduced chemical sensors based on two-dimensional nanomaterials2019, Chemical ReviewsSynergy between nanomaterials and volatile organic compounds for non-invasive medical evaluation2018, Chemical Society ReviewsGas sensing in 2D materials2017, Applied Physics ReviewsA Review on Graphene-Based Gas/Vapor Sensors with Unique Properties and Potential Applications2016, Nano-Micro LettersGraphene-based gas sensors2013, Journal of Materials Chemistry AView all citing articles on Scopus

Recent developments on graphene and graphene oxide based solid state gas sensors2012, Sensors and Actuators, B: ChemicalCitation Excerpt :This problem was overcome after the discovery of graphene that is 2D structure of one atomic thick carbon atom having all the interesting properties of CNT. Very recently graphene attracted the attention of chemical sensor researchers owing to some of its astonishing advantageous properties [80–130], some of which are: The final objective of a dream gas/vapor sensor should be the detection of a species with a sensitivity level down to a single atom or molecule.

Citation Excerpt :This problem was overcome after the discovery of graphene that is 2D structure of one atomic thick carbon atom having all the interesting properties of CNT. Very recently graphene attracted the attention of chemical sensor researchers owing to some of its astonishing advantageous properties [80–130], some of which are: The final objective of a dream gas/vapor sensor should be the detection of a species with a sensitivity level down to a single atom or molecule.

Graphene, a monolayer of graphite sheet consisting of sp2 hybridized carbon atoms covalently bonded to three other atoms (discovered in 2004), has recently attracted the attention of chemical sensor researchers owing to its unprecedented structural, mechanical and electrical properties. Excellent mechanical strength (Young modulus ∼0.05 TPa), potentiality of ultrafast electron transport (highest mobility ∼200,000 cm2/V s) along with the best surface to volume ratio has opened up the opportunity to use the material for future gas and vapor sensors with ultra fast speed and long-term durability. Since it is a two dimensional material, every atom of graphene may be considered a surface atom and as a result every atom site may be involved in the gas interactions. This feature of graphene can eventually be responsible for its ultra sensitive sensor response with the lowest detection capability approaching even a single molecule. Further, the ease of functionalization of the material either by chemical means (absorption of many molecules like oxygen or hydrogen) or by application of voltage or pressure, facilitates bandgap-engineering which in turn may lead to a possible solution to the selectivity issues, the perennial problems of chemical sensors. In this review, the latest advancement and new perspectives of graphene based gas and vapor sensors have been discussed critically.

Electrically-transduced chemical sensors based on two-dimensional nanomaterials2019, Chemical Reviews

Synergy between nanomaterials and volatile organic compounds for non-invasive medical evaluation2018, Chemical Society Reviews

Gas sensing in 2D materials2017, Applied Physics Reviews

A Review on Graphene-Based Gas/Vapor Sensors with Unique Properties and Potential Applications2016, Nano-Micro Letters

Graphene-based gas sensors2013, Journal of Materials Chemistry A

International Vacuum Congress (IVC-18)Edited byHaimingGuo,HongjunGao,WernerHofer,FedericoRoseiDownload full issue

International Vacuum Congress (IVC-18)Edited byHaimingGuo,HongjunGao,WernerHofer,FedericoRosei

Edited byHaimingGuo,HongjunGao,WernerHofer,FedericoRosei

No articles found.

View details