Quantitative Spermidine Detection in Cosmetics using an Organic Transistor-Based Chemical Sensor
This article relates to:
Dr. Yui Sasaki, Kohei Ohshiro, Miyuki Kato, Hikaru Tanaka, Akari Yamagami, Dr. Kazutake Hagiya, Prof. Dr. Tsuyoshi Minami
First published: 05 September 2024 https://doi.org/10.1002/open.202400098
Find It at UChicago
SectionsPDFTools Share
Graphical Abstract
An extended-gate-type organic transistor can be used to quantify spermidine levels in cosmetic ingredient products without complicated sample purification. The accurate detection results, validated by HPLC, indicate the potential of organic transistors as platforms for cosmetic analysis.

Description unavailable
Abstract
Spermidine is an essential biomarker related to antiaging. Although the detection of spermidine levels is in high demand in life science fields, easy-to-use analytical tools without sample purification have not yet been fully established. Herein, we propose an organic field-effect transistor-based chemical sensor for quantifying the spermidine concentration in commercial cosmetics. An extended-gate structure was employed for organic field-effect transistor (OFET)-based chemical sensing in aqueous media. A coordination-bond-based sensing system was introduced into the OFET device to visualize the spermidine detection information through changes in the transistor characteristics. The extended-gate-type OFET has shown quantitative responses to spermidine, which indicates sufficient detectability (i. e., the limit of detection for spermidine: 2.3 μM) considering actual concentrations in cosmetics. The applicability of the OFET-based chemical sensor for cosmetic analysis was validated by instrumental analysis using high-performance liquid chromatography. The estimated recovery rates for spermidine in cosmetic ingredient products (108–111 %) suggest the feasibility of cosmetic analysis based on the OFET-based chemical sensor.

Introduction
Polyamines are essential biological species involved in cell growth, gene expression, protein synthesis, and autophagy,1 the physiological functions of which are closely associated with biological aging (or senescence).2 Therefore, polyamines are crucial markers for examining aging-associated pathologies (e. g., cardiovascular disease, cancer, and metabolic disorders).3 In particular, spermidine modulates aging and suppresses age-related diseases.4 In this regard, the association between spermidine and biological aging has received attention in life science fields from a health and beauty perspective.5 Although spermidine assessment is in high demand in various research fields, easy-to-use methods for monitoring spermidine levels have not been satisfactorily established. Motivated by this demand, we propose a chemical sensor device based on an organic field-effect transistor (OFET) to quantify the spermidine concentration in commercial cosmetic ingredient products.

OFETs are electronic devices with gate, source, and drain electrodes; a dielectric; and an organic semiconductive layer, which shows unique switching properties upon the application of voltages.6 Solution processability, by employing highly soluble materials for device fabrication, can accelerate the development of OFET-based chemical sensors using printing technologies.7 The transistor characteristics (i. e., drain currents and threshold voltages) are manipulated by the gate potentials, indicating that a gate electrode can be used as a sensing unit by functionalizing it with recognition materials.8 An extended-gate structure, which isolates the sensing unit from the operation unit (i. e., an OFET), allows the stable electrical detection of analytes in aqueous media.8 Extended-gate gold (Au) electrodes can easily be functionalized with molecular recognition materials such as self-assembled monolayers (SAMs).9 The transistor characteristics depend on the surface potential of the extended-gate electrode functionalized with the SAM-based molecular recognition materials upon analyte detection.10 Recently, we proposed a new strategy for polyamine detection based on coordination bonds using an extended-gate-type OFET.11 However, the applicability of this sensing method has not been fully evaluated in real-sample analyses. In this study, an OFET-based chemical sensor for spermidine detection was used for cosmetic analysis without sample purification.

Copper(II) ions (Cu2+) were selected as the charge manipulators to create a coordination-bond-based sensing system using an OFET (vide infra).11, 12 2-Carboxymethylthio-5-mercapto-1,3,4-thiadiazole (TMT) functionalized on an extended-gate electrode can coordinate with Cu2+ ions.11, 13 However, the binding affinity between TMT and Cu2+ ions is lower than that between Cu2+ ions and spermidine. Therefore, the Cu2+ ions accumulated on the TMT-attached extended-gate electrode caused changes in the transistor characteristics with the addition of spermidine because of the removal of Cu2+ ions from the TMT-Cu2+ complex (Figure 1). In addition, the electron density of the heteroaromatic structure of TMT was higher than that of the mercapto-benzoic acid derivatives.14, 15 Therefore, the proposed sensing system can induce distinct surface potential changes in the extended-gate electrode by detecting spermidine in cosmetic ingredient products.

Details are in the caption following the image
Figure 1
Open in figure viewer
PowerPoint
Schematic illustration of the extended-gate-type OFET chemical sensor for spermidine. The extended-gate Au electrode was functionalized with TMT to accumulate Cu2+ ions. Spermidine detection is performed by a competitive assay among TMT, the Cu2+ ions, and the target spermidine.

Experimental
Fabrication and Operation of the OFET-Based Chemical Sensor
The designed OFET device consisted of an aluminum (Al) gate, Au source, and drain electrodes. A double dielectric layer composed of aluminum oxide (AlOx) and tetradecylphosphonic acid (TDPA)16 was employed to operate the OFET at low voltages (< |3| V) for analyte detection in aqueous media. The semiconducting layer was fabricated via a drop-casting approach using a solution-processable polymer semiconductor (i. e., poly{2,5-bis(3-tetradecylthiophen-2-yl)thieno[3,2-b]thiophene}, PBTTT−C14).17 The surface of the OFET device was fully covered with an amorphous fluorinated polymer material (i. e., CYTOPTM) to passivate the semiconducting layer. The details of the device fabrication process are summarized in the Supporting Information (SI) (Figure S1).

The extended-gate electrode was functionalized stepwise with TMT and Cu2+ ions. An extended-gate Au electrode (15 mm2 area, 100 nm thickness) was formed on a polyethylene naphthalate film by vacuum thermal deposition (SVC-700TMSGS, Sanyu Electron Co., Ltd.). The Au electrode was gently rinsed with Milli-Q water and ethanol and then dried under a N2 gas flow. The Au electrode was further treated using a UV-O3 cleaner (ASUMI-GIKEN, ASM401 OZ) for 10 min before subsequent modification. The extended-gate Au electrode was immersed in a methanol solution of TMT (10 mM) for 1 h at 25 °C under ambient conditions. The Au electrode surface was gently rinsed with methanol and dried under a N2 gas flow. Next, the Au electrode functionalized with TMT was further immersed into a buffer solution made of 4-(2-hydroxyethyl)-1-piperazineethanesulfonic acid (100 mM, pH 7.4 at 25 °C) containing Cu(ClO4)2 (1 mM) for 1 h at 25 °C under ambient conditions. After this period, the electrode was rinsed with ultrapure water and dried under a N2 gas flow. The extended-gate electrode was connected to an OFET using a conductive cable for chemical sensing. A reference electrode (Ag/AgCl, model RE-1B, BAS, Inc.) was used to apply the gate voltage (Figure 1).

The basic characteristics of the fabricated OFET were evaluated using a source meter (2612 B, Keythley) under ambient conditions. The transfer characteristics were obtained by scanning from 0.5 to −3 V as the gate voltage (VGS) and −2 V as the drain-source voltage (VDS). The output characteristics were recorded at 0 to −3 V (step: −1 V) as VGS and 0 to −3 V as VDS. The OFET exhibited switching properties under ambient conditions (Figure S2).

High-Performance Liquid Chromatography Analysis
The concentrations of representative polyamines (i. e., putrescine, spermidine, and spermine) were validated using high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) (Figure S3). Standard stock solutions of polyamines were prepared using HClaq. (0.1 M). The concentrations of each stock solution were 99.8 mM for putrescine, 124.1 mM for spermidine, and 53.9 mM for spermine, respectively. A standard mixture solution was prepared by using the stock solutions (putrescine (100 μL, 99.8 mM), spermidine (80 μL, 124.1 mM), spermine (185 μL, 53.9 mM)), and HClaq. (635 μL, 0.1 M). The concentration of each polyamine in the standard mixture was 10 mM. The standard mixture was diluted with HClaq. (0.1 M) to adjust the concentrations of each polyamine to 0.3, 1, 3, 10, 30, and 100 μM.

The target polyamines were labeled using dansyl derivatization. Cosmetic ingredients, including polyamines (PHYTOPOLYAMINETM-S (solution) and PHYTOPOLYAMINETM-SP (powder)), were dissolved in HClaq (0.1 M). The concentrations of the aqueous solutions of PHYTOPOLYAMINETM-S and PHYTOPOLYAMINETM-SP were adjusted to 200 and 10 mg/mL, respectively. A reference sample made of 1,7-diaminoheptane (50 μL, 10 μM), dansyl chloride in acetone (300 μL, 1 wt%), and a saturated aqueous solution of sodium carbonate (50 μL) was injected into the polyamine mixture solution (50 μL). The obtained solution was incubated at 70 °C for 15 min. After this period, the proline solution (50 μL, 10 wt%) was added to the mixture and incubated at 70 °C for 5 min. When a yellow solution was obtained, toluene was added, followed by vortexing for 30 s. Centrifugation was performed at 15000 rpm for 10 min at 15 °C (HIGH SPEED MICRO CENTRIFUGE MX-150, TOMY), and a toluene layer was removed. The obtained solution was dried at 40 °C for 1 h under N2 gas flow using an aluminum block dry bath (Dry ThermoUnit DTU-1BN, TAITEC). Subsequently, an aqueous acetonitrile solution (1.0 mL, acetonitrile/water=1 : 1 vol./vol.) was added to the dried residue. The mixture was centrifuged at 15000 rpm for 2 min at 15 °C. The supernatant was subjected to HPLC analysis.

The employed HPLC apparatus (Shimadzu) was equipped with a CBM-20 A communications bus module, a Shimpack GIST C18 column (4.6 mm×250 mm, 3 μm), Shimpack GIST C18 guard column (4.6 mm×50 mm, 3 μm), a DGU-20 A3 degasser, an LC-20AD pump, a SIL-10ADvp autosampler, a CTO-20 A column oven, and an RF-10AXL fluorescence detector. HPLC measurement conditions were as follows: flowrate, 0.8 mL/min; excitation and emission wavelengths of the fluorescence detector, 340 and 515 nm; column oven temperature, 40 °C; and injection volume, 5 μL. The mobile phase consisted of acetonitrile and Milli-Q water with gradient flow. The acetonitrile concentration was increased from 65 vol.% to 100 vol.% within 15 min and then kept at 100 vol.% until it was reduced to 65 vol.% at 20 min and ended at 30 min. Chromatographic data were acquired and processed using Shimadzu LabSolutions software.

Results and Discussion
Establishment of a Calibration Line using the OFET-Based Chemical Sensor for Spermidine Levels
A calibration line for spermidine analysis in cosmetics was established using transistor characteristics upon the addition of spermidine at different concentrations in a buffer solution containing N-cyclohexyl-2-aminoethanesulfonic acid (CHES, 50 mM) and NaCl (10 mM) at pH 8.5. The basic conditions were adjusted based on the superior coordination of spermidine and Cu2+ ions.18 Figure 2(a) shows the changes in the transistor characteristics upon the addition of spermidine. According to the detection principle based on a competitive assay, Cu2+ ions were removed from the Cu2+-TMT complex by coordination with the target spermidine. The removal of cationic species from the extended-gate electrode caused changes in the surface potential, resulting in positive shifts in the transfer characteristics. The correlation between the spermidine concentration and threshold voltage (VTH) in Figure 2(b) suggests that the shift in transistor characteristics quantitatively corresponds to the spermidine concentration. The detection limit for spermidine (2.3 μM) was determined by the 3σ method.19 Considering the actual concentrations of spermidine in cosmetics, the sensitivity of the OFET-based chemical sensor was sufficient for cosmetic analysis.

Details are in the caption following the image
Figure 2
Open in figure viewer
PowerPoint
(a) Transfer curves of the OFET-based chemical sensor upon the addition of spermidine in a CHES buffer solution (50 mM) containing NaCl (10 mM) at pH 8.5. Transistor characteristics at each spermidine concentration were recorded after incubation for 5 min at 25 °C. (b) The correlation between the spermidine concentration and threshold voltage (VTH). The terms VTH0 and VTH indicate threshold voltages before and after the addition of spermidine at different concentrations. The correlation was obtained by collecting VTHs at VGS=−2 V.

Determination of Spermidine Levels in Cosmetic Ingredient Products
We performed a real-sample analysis and established a calibration line using different extended-gate electrodes. The real-sample analysis without any purification was performed for the main target spermidine using the extended-gate-type OFET. Two types of cosmetic ingredient products (i. e., PHYTOPOLYAMINETM-S (solution) and PHYTOPOLYAMINETM-SP (powder)) were used as real samples to evaluate the applicability of the OFET-based sensing method. For validation, spermidine concentrations in commercial cosmetic ingredient products were estimated using HPLC analysis (Figure S4 and Table S1). The concentrations of putrescine and spermine were lower than those of spermidine, implying that the effect of these amines in response to spermidine was weak. The datasets (red circles) for spermidine in PHYTOPOLYAMINETM-S were closely distributed on the established calibration line (Figure 3). The recovery rates were estimated to be 108–111 % (Table 1). Moreover, an OFET-based chemical sensor was used to quantify spermidine levels in PHYTOPOLYAMINETM-SP. The determined recovery rates were 105–116 % (Table S2). This study suggests the potential of the OFET-based chemical sensor for the evaluation of spermidine levels in cosmetic ingredient products with high accuracy.

Details are in the caption following the image
Figure 3
Open in figure viewer
PowerPoint
Spike and recovery test for spermidine contained in a commercial cosmetic ingredient product (i. e., PHYTOPOLYAMINETM-S).

Table 1. Spike and recovery test results for spermidine contained in a commercial cosmetic ingredient (i. e., PHYTOPOLYAMINETM-S).
Actual [Spermidine] (μM)

Found [Spermidine] (μM)

Recovery rate (%)

17.23

18.7±0.2

108

26.24

29.2±0.8

111

34.46

38.6±0.8

110

Conclusions
Spermidine is a representative ingredient contained in cosmetics because of its antiaging effects. Although the interest in spermidine evaluation has increased in life science fields, an easy-to-use analytical method for spermidine detection is challenging. Therefore, we designed a chemical sensor device based on an OFET for cosmetic analysis without complicated sample purification. A competitive detection system based on coordination bonds was introduced into an extended-gate-type OFET to visualize spermidine detection information through changes in transistor characteristics. The fabricated OFET-based chemical sensor showed quantitative detection of the target spermidine with a low limit of detection value (2.3 μM). The sensitivity of the OFET-based sensor for spermidine was sufficient considering its concentrations in cosmetic ingredient products. The applicability of the OFET-based chemical sensor was revealed by the spike and recovery rates of spermidine in commercial cosmetics. The accuracy of the OFET-based chemical sensor was validated using conventional HPLC. In addition, because OFETs can be fabricated on plastic films using printing technologies,7d-7f flexible chemical sensors may allow the monitoring of spermidine levels in the skin.

ChemistryOpen
Supporting Information
Quantitative Spermidine Detection in Cosmetics using an
Organic Transistor-Based Chemical Sensor
Yui Sasaki, Kohei Ohshiro, Miyuki Kato, Hikaru Tanaka, Akari Yamagami, Kazutake Hagiya,
and Tsuyoshi Minami*

S1
Supporting Information
Quantitative Spermidine Detection in Cosmetics using an
Organic Transistor-based Chemical Sensor
Yui Sasaki,[a, b] Kohei Ohshiro,[a] Miyuki Kato,[a] Hikaru Tanaka,
[c] Akari Yamagami,[c] Kazutake
Hagiya,[c] and Tsuyoshi Minami*[a]
[a] Institute of Industrial Science, The University of Tokyo, 4-6-1 Komaba, Meguro-ku, Tokyo 153-8505,
Japan. E-mail: tminami@g.ecc.u-tokyo.ac.jp
[b] JST, PRESTO, 4-1-8 Honcho, Kawaguchi, 332-0012 Saitama, Japan.
[c] Corporate Research Center, Toyobo Co., Ltd., 2-1-1 Katata, Otsu, 520-0292 Shiga, Japan.
Contents
1. Reagents and materials S2
2. Fabrication and evaluation of an extended-gate type OFET sensor S2
3. HPLC analysis S4
4. Real-sample analysis using the OFET-based chemical sensor S5
Reference S5
S2
1. Reagents and materials
Reagents and solvents obtained from commercial suppliers were applied without further purification.
The reagents purchased from Merck KGaA were copper(II) perchlorate hexahydrate (Cu(ClO4)2・
6H2O), spermidine, and spermine tetrahydrochloride. 1,4-Diaminobutane dihydrochloride (putrescine),
1,7-diaminoheptane, dansyl chloride, L-proline, and tetradecylphosphonic acid (TDPA) were obtained
from Tokyo Chemical Industry Co. Ltd. Sodium chloride, hydrochloric acid (HCl), ethanol, toluene,
acetone, 2-propanol, and methanol were purchased from Kanto Chemical Co. Inc. Sodium carbonate
and poly{2,5-bis(3-tetradecylthiophen-2-yl)thieno[3,2-b]thiophene} were obtained from FUJIFILM
Wako Pure Chemical Industries, Ltd. and Merck KGaA, respectively. Materials supplied by AGC Co.
Ltd. were an amorphous fluorinated polymer CYTOP™ (model: CTX-809M) and
perfluorotributylamine. Glass substrates (model: Eagle XG, 2 cm × 2.5 cm) obtained from Corning,
Inc. was used for device fabrication. Materials for vacuum deposition were aluminum (Al) wire (1ϕ)
and gold (Au) particle, which were purchased from Furuuchi Chemical Co., Ltd and Tanaka Kikinzoku
Kogyo Co., Ltd, respectively. N-Cyclohexyl-2-aminoethanesulfonic acid (CHES) and 4-(2-
hydroxyethyl)-1-piperazineethanesulfonic acid (HEPES) were purchased from Dojindo Laboratories.
2-Carboxymethylthio-5-mercapto-1,3,4-thiadiazole (TMT), PHYTOPOLYAMINETM-S,
PHYTOPOLYAMINETM-SP, and polyethylene naphthalate (PEN) films were supplied by Toyobo Co.,
Ltd. Aqueous solutions for all experiments were prepared using a Milli-Q water system (18.2 MΩ・cm).
2. Fabrication and evaluation of an extended-gate type OFET sensor
2.1 OFET fabrication
The eagle glass substrate (2 cm × 2.5 cm) was treated with piranha solution (H2SO4:H2O2 = 4:1 (v/v))
before device fabrication. A gate electrode made of Al (30 nm in thickness) was fabricated using a
vacuum thermal deposition apparatus (SVC-700TMSGS, Sanyu Electron Co., Ltd.). Shadow masks
were used for patterning. The surface of Al electrodes was activated by a reactive ion etching (RIE)
process (SAMCO RIE-10NR) to obtain an aluminum oxide (AlOx) dielectric layer. Subsequently, the
glass substrate was entirely covered with a fluorinated polymer solution (CLT-809M in CT-Solv.180,
ratio 1:1 (v/v)) using a spin-coater apparatus (MIKASA SPINCOATER 1H-D7). The glass substrate
was baked at 110 °C for 10 min in the inert atmosphere glovebox (UNICO, UL-1300A-MSP), followed
by the RIE treatment along with a shadow mask to form a hydrophobic bank. After this process, the
glass substrate was immersed into a 2-propanol solution containing TDPA (10 mM) for 15 h at 25 °C.
The substrate was rinsed with 2-propanol and dried by N2 gas flow. After the baking process for 30
min at 110 °C, the monolayer-based dielectric layer was formed on the AlOx layer. Source and drain
electrodes made of Au (30 nm in thickness) were fabricated by using the thermal evaporation
apparatus along with a shadow mask. The polymer semiconductive layer was fabricated by dropcasting a 1,2-dichlorobenzene solution containing PBTTT-C14 (0.0075wt%) onto the channel area
(width: 1,000 µm, length: 50 µm). The substrate was annealed at 160 °C for 10 min under the inert
atmosphere. Finally, a hydrophobic layer made of CYTOPTM on (CLT-809M in CT-Solv.180, ratio 1:1
(v/v)) for passivation was formed by spin-coating and then baked at 110 °C for 10 min (Figure S1).
The reproducibility of the fabricated OFET was evaluated in a previous report.
[S1]
S3
Figure S1. Fabrication scheme for the OFET device.
2.2 Basic OFET characteristics
Figure S2. (a) Transfer and (b) output characteristics of the manufactured OFET device.
S4
3. HPLC analysis
The samples for HPLC analysis were treated according to a previously reported method.[S2]
Figure S3. (a) HPLC charts of the standard mixture solution for the establishment of calibration lines.
Each peak indicates putrescine, spermidine, and spermine. (b) Correlation between polyamine
concentrations and area ratio obtained by HPLC analysis.
Figure S4. HPLC charts of (a) a control solution (i.e., dansyl chloride after the sample treatment),
cosmetic products (b) PHYTOPOLYAMINETM-S (200 mg/mL), and (c) PHYTOPOLYAMINETM-SP (10
mg/mL). Each labeled peak indicates 1,7-diaminoheptane (×, internal standard), putrescine (□),
spermidine (△), and spermine (〇), respectively.
S5
Table S1. Estimated concentrations of polyamines in cosmetic ingredient products by HPLC
Cosmetics Putrescine (µM) Spermidine (µM) Spermine (µM)
PHYTOPOLYAMINETM-S 5.93 115.78 21.11
PHYTOPOLYAMINETM-SP 10.55 101.52 16.59
4. Real-sample analysis using the OFET-based chemical sensor
The spike and recovery tests were demonstrated using two cosmetic ingredient products. The
PHYTOPOLYAMINETM-S solutions were mixed with the CHES buffer solution, and their
concentrations were 30.7, 47.5, and 67.3 mg/mL. A powder PHYTOPOLYAMINETM-SP was also
dissolved in the CHES buffer, and their concentrations were prepared at 2.8, 3.4, 4.1, and 4.8 mg/mL.
Table S2. Spike and recovery test results for spermidine contained in a cosmetic ingredient product
(PHYTOPOLYAMINETM-SP)
Actual [Spermidine] (µM) Found [Spermidine] (µM) Recovery rate (%)
26.52 30.7±0.39 116
33.15 36.4±0.39 110
39.77 41.8±0.78 105
46.40 50.2±1.07 108
Reference
S1. H. Fan, Q. Zhou, R. Mitobe, W. Tang, K. Watanabe, T. Nezaki, N. Nagai and T. Minami, MRS Commun.
2022, 12, 592−596.
S2. ORYZA POLYAMINE-LC(BG30). https://www.oryza.co.jp/cms/wpcontent/uploads/2019/06/161020-
ORYZA-POLYAMINE-LCBG30.pdf (accessed March 22, 2024).