Flexible Organic Electrolyte Gated FET Biosensor
with Integrated Soft Fluidics for Cortisol
Monitoring in Oral Samples
Roslyn S. Massey and Ravi Prakash
Dept. of Electronics, Carleton University, Ottawa, Canada
raviprakash@carleton.ca
Abstract—Electrolyte Gated Field Effect Transistor
(EGFET) devices are ideal biosensor platforms as they require
small sample volumes, can directly transduce biomolecule
quantities to electrical signals, and have a fast sensor response
time, making them a desirable candidate for future integration
into a Point of Care (PoC) device. However, the lack of emphasis
on EGFET device integration with fluidic sample handling has
led to very few architectures that are PoC viable in their present
states. In response, we have created the first flexible, organic,
electrolyte gated FET (OEGFET) cortisol sensor, with
integrated soft fluidic microchannels. Our OEGFET
demonstrates excellent cortisol sensing properties, with
improved longevity, electrical characteristics, and detection
range over previously published OEGFET devices. The device
demonstrates robustness to repeated testing and preserved
bioactivity over a period of 15 days. The nominal operating
voltage is up to 5V, 4x lower than the previously reported device.
The broad cortisol sensitivity range of 27.6µM - 2.76pM
comprehensively covers the physiological concentration range
of cortisol in saliva, with a detection limit 10x lower than our
previous device. The integrated device is low temperature and
low-cost fabricated onto flexible polymer substrates, tailored as
the first such PoC compatible EGFET oral biosensor reported.
Keywords— electrolyte-gated FETs, oral cortisol biosensor,
Point-of-Care device, amperometric biosensors, soft-fluidics.
I. INTRODUCTION
Organic Field Effect Transistors (OFET) are applicable to
flexible electronics, wearables, sensors, and opto-electronic
displays. OFET biosensor literature tends to describe device
architectures as PoC or lab on a chip compatible [1]. This
would be ideal, as their facile nature, low-cost, large area
processability, and flexible form factor mean OFET
biosensors could revolutionize biomolecule testing [2].
Unfortunately, most device examples are not, in their current
state, viable for PoC integration. Integration requires sample
collection, pretreatment, an analyte specific reaction, signal
production, detection, and result reporting completed by a
single system [3]. Despite effectively producing and
detecting signals, literature devices are incompatible with
integration materials and processes. In addition, organic
semiconductors (OSC) are highly sensitive to environmental
conditions leading to negative effects such as voltage drift,
OSC degradation, high power requirements [4,5].
In Electrolyte Gated Organic FET Devices (EGOFETs),
the sample directly participates in device operating states.
EGOFETs have excellent sensor resolution with Limits of
Detection (LoD) as low as 1 pM [6-8]. However, direct
contact of OSC and electrolyte causes OSC degradation and
voltage drift as polar solvents locally negate electrical field at
grain boundaries, resulting in poor repeatability and
negligible longevity [9-11]. Exposed OSC would be
irreparably damaged by soft fluidic surface bonding
processes, making EGOFETs incompatible with
microchannel integration.
Extended Gate OFETs attempt to solve EGOFET
integration problems by isolating the transduction element as
a distinct capacitive element. This leads to dramatically
increased complexity in fabrication steps, cumbersome
testing requirements, and reduced transduction element
sensitivity [1,6,13]. Such devices rely on reference potentials
from bulky reference sensors unsuited for microscale sample
volumes, or alternatively attempt to eliminate reference
electrodes through an interdigitated electrode and exposed
OSC, negating isolated transduction element benefits [14].
To mitigate the OFET biosensor challenges, we
previously proposed the Label-free, aptamer enhanced
OEGFET [15]. Our unique device architecture leverages a
multilayered gate stack to prevent semiconductor
degradation, minimize gate leakage noise and prevent polar
solvent-based voltage drift [7]. Isolating the OSC reduced
gate leakage and prevented voltage drift but relied on
conventional SiO2 substrates and macro-machined PDMS
wells, weakening signal intensity due to large plate
separations. Here, we have transformed the OEGFET into a
novel, fully flexible cortisol biosensor device by integrating
low temperature deposited soft polymer microchannels. We
have significantly improved our previously reported
OEGFET cortisol biosensor, lowering the detection limit by
a factor of 10 to 2.76pM; reducing the operating voltages by
4x to a maximum requirement of 5 V; and by preserving
electrical characteristics and bioactivity to up to 15 days. The
key improvement in longevity makes integrating this flexible
OEGFET biosensor into a PoC highly feasible.
II. MATERIALS AND METHODS
The device architecture consists of three parts, fabricated
separately, and assembled into a single device (Fig. 1). The
bottom OSC transistor surface and the top gate surface with
target specific aptamers sandwich the PDMS microchannels
(elastomer and curing agent purchased from Dow chemicals,
USA). Both the bottom and top surfaces were fabricated on
flexible Polyimide (Kapton®) substrates purchased from
DuPont Chemicals. (3-Aminopropyl)triethyoxysilane
(APTES) a known cross-linker material for PDMS, was
purchase from Sigma, USA. The aptamer used was based on
cortisol aptamer reported by Martin et al, and synthesized at
the Laboratory for Aptamer Discovery and Development of
978-1-7281-9501-8/21/$31.00 ©2021 IEEE 2021 IEEE Sensors | 978-1-7281-9501-8/21/$31.00 ©2021 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/SENSORS47087.2021.9639461
Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIV OF CHICAGO LIBRARY. Downloaded on February 14,2025 at 02:49:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
Emerging Research, Carleton University [16]. Cortisol and
Progesterone samples (Sigma, USA) in methanol at 1mg/mL
were precipitated, and then resuspended in 0.5mM ascorbic
acid (AA). Cortisol stock was diluted with 0.5mM AA to
produce cortisol electrolyte solutions from 27.6µM (C-1) to
2.76pM (C-8), and progesterone electrolyte control solutions
of 31.8µM (P-1) to 3.18pM (P-8). AA test solutions were
used in proof-of-concept testing prior to complex media.
Fig. 1 (Left) fully integrated device with soft fluidic channels (inset)
Transistor well (right) schematic cross section of device.
The device fabrication process was low temperature to
ensure biomolecule compatibility, and to reduce fabrication
costs. Changes in the dielectric stack from our previous
device were to ensure integration compatibility [15]. The
resulting device is fully organic, highly flexible and low cost.
Bottom Surface fabrication: The bottom Kapton surface
was patterned with 50nm Aluminum and 150 nm Chromium
microelectrode arrays using conventional lift-off
nanofabrication procedures. The transistor clusters have
channel lengths (L) of 25-30µm and aspect ratios (AR) of 20-
60. The surface is then plasma etch activated in a Technics
Planar Etch. The OSC is 500nm of spin-deposited TIPSpentacene. The first dielectric layer is 125nm of spin
deposited PVA. The second bottom surface dielectric is 190-
210 nm spin deposited PDMS (Fig. 1).
PDMS microchannel fabrication: A PDMS microchannel
mold was 3D printed using transparent ABS-like resin on an
ELEGOO Mars UV resin bath printer. The channel
dimensions are 200 x 600 m and the well dimensions are
400 m in height and 4 x 1.9 mm in area (Fig. 1). The cast
PDMS is cured at room temperature for 48 hours.
Top Surface Fabrication: The top surface was 150nm
Chromium, shadow mask deposited. 200nm PMMA was
deposited for PDMS binding and aptamer immobilization.
Device Assembly and Gate Functionalization: The
PMMA was activated in a plasma etcher and placed in an
APTES bath. The cast PDMS and APTES surfaces were
activated and placed in contact before baking at 120oC. The
well was UV activated in a N2 environment. The aptamer
solution was loaded in the well and allowed to dry for 1 hour
in a N2 environment. The top surface was brought into contact
with the uncured PDMS at room temperature for 72 hours.
III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
A. APTES Assisted PDMS microchannel bonding
PDMS microchannel stack was fabricated on Kapton to
test the long-term stability of the soft fluidic microchannels.
Tests involved forcing red or green dyed DI water through
the microchannels for a total of 30s each day. Gradient
pressure in the channel was achieved using a syringe and
hand pressure. The channels remained robust against leakage,
even under bending, up to 15 days after initial fabrication
(Fig.2). In addition, we observed extended longevity in the device performance over the first 15 days. Figure 2c shows the contrast for cortisol 5 transfer characteristics from the first day of testing to day 15. We observed an approximately 20% change is sensor output over the first 15 days, which is in line with current literature examples of high-performance solution processed OFETs [17].
Fig. 2. a. Soft fluidic Microchannel filled with green dye after flexure, b. during flexing, and c. electrical characteristics data from longevity test.
The biosensing activity of these devices is preserved due to aptamer characteristic reversible deformation. We demonstrate not only that the OSC is functional after 15 days of testing, but that the biomolecule recognition element is preserved. The integrated devices can be dried for storage and when reconstituted for testing will not have a significant loss in bioactivity.
B. OEGFET Output Characteristics
The OEGFET output characteristics were tested using a VSD sweep of 0.5 – 2 V with VSG ranges of 1-20V. Expected transistor action was observed in the I-V sweep and demonstrated changes in output current ISD with changes in channel bias. The output I-V curves for a 27.6 pM cortisol solution are shown in Figure 3.
Fig. 3. OEGFET output characteristics for cortisol 7, gate bias range.
The OEGFET demonstrates gate bias modulation, expected transistor behavior. Compared to our previously published data, these devices demonstrate lower operating voltage requirements to reach the same µA ISD ranges [15]. Our previous devices had operating voltage requirements of >20V, in part due to the stacked dielectric set up that was necessary to isolate the gate from the OSC. Superior electrical characteristics are due to the stability from the integrated microchannel system, reducing sample loss and ensuring consistent plate separation. The plate separation in our previous OEGFET varied between 0.8-2mm thick. By reducing separation variations and reducing the plate separation to 400µm, the field effect within the material is stronger and more predictable, intensifying the signal and reducing noise. This has led to the superior repeatability, I-V characteristics and reduced operating voltages observed. The superiority is notable as the transition from conventional rigid wafers to flexible substrates is associated with decreases in electrical characteristics [18]. OSC have around 10% the charge mobilities of their conventional counterparts [19]. Integrating the soft-fluidic microchannel into OEGFETs improved biosensor electrical characteristics.
Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIV OF CHICAGO LIBRARY. Downloaded on February 14,2025 at 02:49:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
C. Aptamer Binding effect on gate modulation
The transfer I-V curves were collected for OEGFET
devices with all cortisol concentrations and progesterone
concentrations (Fig. 4). These devices were tested with a
constant VSD =3.25 V, for a VSG sweep of 0-2V.
Fig. 4. OEGFET device transfer characteristics for various cortisol samples
These devices show ISD modulation and current quantities
dependent on electrolyte biomolecule concentration. The
cortisol solution ISD change from the reference (Ascorbic
Acid) is due to capacitor stack changes with aptamer
biomolecule binding [20]. As established in our previous
work, decreasing target analyte concentration increases
device output current whereas increasing bulk electrolyte
concentration of non-specific analytes increases device
current (see Fig. 5) [15]. The observed antithetical behavior
is from aptamers complexing with biomolecules introducing
new capacitance terms into the capacitance mechanism
[15,20]. This creates the inverse correlation between sample
biomolecule and output characteristic that is ideal for low
concentration (nM physiological range) materials such as
salivary cortisol. The OEGFET has clear distinctions between
tested concentrations which cover the physiological range of
cortisol [21]. The extended response of this device is in a 108
-
fold concentration range, with the lowest concentration
comparable to literature (0.8-1pM) [8,22].
Fig. 5. Aptamer binding effect on device current, cortisol compared to nonbinding progesterone and reference ascorbic acid.
The absence of aptamer-biomolecule complexing is
evident in comparing between progesterone and cortisol ISD
transfer responses; transfer characteristics in Fig. 5. P1-P8
output current increases with concentration – due to
electrolyte bulk capacitance increasing with ionic
concentration – demonstrating no binding event occurs to
produce the inverse correlation of the cortisol dilutions. The
devices are cortisol-specific, as previously established [15].
D. Amperometric Biosensor Performance
The combined signal production and signal detection
transduction of the label-free OEGFET is promising due to
the inverse correlation between signal intensity and
concentration, unlike most electrochemical and labelled
devices that have decreasing signal intensity with decreasing
concentration. The relationship between output current and
electrical properties is defined by our modified Marinov
model of output current using Eqn. 1 [15,23].
(1) The µ0 value is the charge density, an intrinsic property of the semiconductor. The voltage dependence portion of the charge density is accounted for in the Vaa1+m and power exponential term of the turn on voltage, the VSG - |VT| term. Under the same applied currents, the only term that would change is the lumped capacitance cdi term.
Fig. 6. Amperometric sensor response and device capacitance change to cortisol concentration variation.
Figure 6 shows current boxplots with plotted lumped capacitance vs concentration for VSG = 0-2V for repeated tests at VSD of 3.5 V. Operating the device as a constant voltage amperometric sensor will yield the output current as amperometric response. This shows the efficacy of our biosensing device under low voltage operations, with output current showing delineations between concentrations. By extracting the cdi values, the differences are even more pronounced. These devices are cortisol specific, have a ~1ms response time, and are repeatable over varied cortisol concentrations in different experiments.
IV. CONCLUSION
We have demonstrated the first flexible, OEGFET biosensor with integrated soft fluidics, fabricated through a novel low temperature, low-cost processes and experimentally validated to be highly specific and sensitive to cortisol. Improvements to device performance over previously published OEGFET sensor include 4x reduction in operating voltages, 10x lower cortisol detection limit, and preserved electrical characteristics and bioactivity up to 15 days. The device has a broad detection range of 2.76pM - 27.6µM for spiked, synthetic cortisol samples, and it requires low operative voltages up to 5V, ideal for low power operations. The OEGFET demonstrates high specificity to the steroid cortisol when tested against the steroid progesterone, with excellent repeatability and predictable distinction between concentration vs output current responses, which is the basis for our constant voltage, amperometric cortisol biosensor. The low cost, low temperature fabrication process produces an integrated biosensor that is one step closer to a fully integrated, sample to analysis PoC device. It possesses the attributes of a reliable biosensor in form of fast turn on, selectivity for a biomolecule of interest, reusability, and stability. The integration of the microchannels and the retention of their excellent sensor properties make the integrated OEGFET the first example of a commercially viable electrolyte gated transistor-based biosensor device. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTSThe authors acknowledge the financial support from NSERC Canada and the fabrication assistance from the Carleton Microfab team.
Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIV OF CHICAGO LIBRARY. Downloaded on February 14,2025 at 02:49:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
REFERENCES
[1] S. Chenfang, X. Wang, M. Auwalu, S. Cheng, and W. Hu. "Organic
thin film transistors‐based biosensors." EcoMat 3, no. 2 (2021):
e12094.
[2] Sun, Chenfang, Yi-Xuan Wang, Mingyuan Sun, Ye Zou, Congcong
Zhang, Shanshan Cheng, and Wenping Hu. "Facile and cost-effective
liver cancer diagnosis by water-gated organic field-effect
transistors." Biosensors and Bioelectronics 164 (2020): 112251.
[3] Chin, Curtis D., Vincent Linder, and Samuel K. Sia.
"Commercialization of microfluidic point-of-care diagnostic devices."
Lab on a Chip 12, no. 12 (2012): 2118-2134.
[4] Jia, Xiaojia, Canek Fuentes-Hernandez, Cheng-Yin Wang, Youngrak
Park, and Bernard Kippelen. "Stable organic thin-film transistors."
Science advances 4, no. 1 (2018): eaao1705.
[5] Chen, Xiong, Hao Zhang, Yu Zhang, Xiangfeng Guan, Zitong Zhang,
and Dagui Chen. "Low-power flexible organic field-effect transistors
with solution-processable polymer-ceramic nanoparticle composite
dielectrics." Nanomaterials 10, no. 3 (2020): 518.
[6] Pullano, Salvatore Andrea, Costantino Davide Critello, Ifana Mahbub,
Nishat Tarannum Tasneem, Samira Shamsir, Syed Kamrul Islam,
Marta Greco, and Antonino S. Fiorillo. "EGFET-based sensors for
bioanalytical applications: A review." Sensors 18, no. 11 (2018): 4042.
[7] Feng, Cong, Ognian Marinov, M. Jamal Deen, Ponnambalam Ravi
Selvaganapathy, and Yiliang Wu. "Sensitivity of the threshold voltage
of organic thin-film transistors to light and water." Journal of Applied
Physics 117, no. 18 (2015): 185501.
[8] Seshadri P, Manoli K, Schneiderhan-Marra N, Anthes U,
Wierzchowiec P, Bonrad K, Torsi L (2018), “Low-picomolar, labelfree procalcitonin analytical detection with an electrolyte-gated organic
field-effect transistor based electronic immunosensor.” Biosensors and
Bioelectronics, vol. 104, pp. 113-119.
[9] Ni, Zhenjie, Huanli Dong, Hanlin Wang, Shang Ding, Ye Zou, Qiang
Zhao, Yonggang Zhen, Feng Liu, Lang Jiang, and Wenping Hu.
"Quinoline‐Flanked Diketopyrrolopyrrole Copolymers Breaking
through Electron Mobility over 6 cm2 V− 1 s− 1 in Flexible Thin Film
Devices." Advanced Materials 30, no. 10 (2018): 1704843.
[10] Parkula, Vitaliy, Marcello Berto, Chiara Diacci, Bianca Patrahau,
Michele Di Lauro, Alessandro Kovtun, Andrea Liscio et al.
"Harnessing selectivity and sensitivity in electronic biosensing: a novel
lab-on-chip multigate organic transistor." Analytical Chemistry 92, no.
13 (2020): 9330-9337.
[11] Selvaraj, Meenu, Pierpaolo Greco, Matteo Sensi, Gulseren Deniz
Saygin, Noemi Bellassai, Roberta D'Agata, Giuseppe Spoto, and Fabio
Biscarini. "Label free detection of miRNA-21 with electrolyte gated
organic field effect transistors (EGOFETs)." Biosensors and
Bioelectronics 182 (2021): 113144.
[12] Sailapu, Sunil Kumar, Eleonora Macchia, Irene Merino-Jimenez, Juan
Pablo Esquivel, Lucia Sarcina, G. Scamarcio, Shelley D. Minteer,
Luisa Torsi, and Neus Sabaté. "Standalone operation of an EGOFET
for ultra-sensitive detection of HIV." Biosensors and
Bioelectronics 156 (2020): 112103.
[13] Sheibani, Shokoofeh, Luca Capua, Sadegh Kamaei, Sayedeh Shirin
Afyouni Akbari, Junrui Zhang, Hoel Guerin, and Adrian M. Ionescu.
"Extended gate field-effect-transistor for sensing cortisol stress
hormone." Communications materials 2, no. 1 (2021): 1-10.
[14] Ali, Ghusoon M. "Interdigitated extended gate field effect transistor
without reference electrode." Journal of Electronic Materials 46, no. 2
(2017): 713-717.
[15] Massey, Roslyn, Siziwe Bebe, and Ravi Prakash. "Aptamer-Enhanced
Organic Electrolyte-Gated FET Biosensor for High-Specificity
Detection of Cortisol." IEEE Sensors Letters 4, no. 7 (2020): 1-4.
[16] Martin J, et al (2014), "Tunable stringency aptamer selection and gold
nanoparticle assay for detection of cortisol." Analytical and
bioanalytical chemistry, vol. 406 no. 19, pp. 4637-4647.
[17] Iqbal, M. Javaid, Hamna Haq, Saira Riaz, M. Akram Raza, M. Zahir
Iqbal, Mujeeb Ullah Chaudhry, and Shahzad Naseem. "On the
Operational, shelf life and degradation mechanism in polymer field
effect transistors." Superlattices and Microstructures 126 (2019): 125-
131.
[18] Lewis, Jay. "Material challenge for flexible organic devices." Materials
today 9, no. 4 (2006): 38-45.
[19] Haneef, Hamna F., Andrew M. Zeidell, and Oana D. Jurchescu.
"Charge carrier traps in organic semiconductors: a review on the
underlying physics and impact on electronic devices." Journal of
Materials Chemistry C 8, no. 3 (2020): 759-787.
[20] Massey, Roslyn, Rana Amache, Siziwe Bebe, and Ravi Prakash. "A
Comprehensive Modelling Approach for Bio-EDLC systems." In 2020
IEEE Sensors, pp. 1-4. IEEE, 2020.
[21] Laudat, M. H., S. Cerdas, C. Fournier, D. Guiban, B. Guilhaume, and
J. P. Luton. "Salivary cortisol measurement: a practical approach to
assess pituitary-adrenal function." The Journal of Clinical
Endocrinology & Metabolism 66, no. 2 (1988): 343-348.
[22] Berto M, Diacci C, D'Agata R, Pinti M, Bianchini E, Di Lauro M,
Casalini S, Cossarizza A, Berggren M, Simon D, Spoto G, Biscarini F,
Bortolotti C A (2018), “EGOFET Peptide Aptasensor for Label‐
Free Detection of Inflammatory Cytokines in Complex Fluids”., Adv.
Biosys., vol. 2, pp. 1700072, doi:
https://doi.org/10.1002/adbi.201700072.
[23] Marinov, Ognian, M. Jamal Deen, Ute Zschieschang, and Hagen
Klauk. "Organic thin-film transistors: Part I—Compact DC modeling."
IEEE Transactions on Electron Devices 56, no. 12 (2009): 2952-2961.
Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIV OF CHICAGO LIBRARY. Downloaded on February 14,2025 at 02:49:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply. 