This may be the author’s version of a work that was submitted/accepted
for publication in the following source:
Wang, Bin, Huynh, Tan-Phat, Wu, Weiwei, Hayek, Naseem, Do, Thu Trang,
Cancilla, John, Torrecilla, Jose, Nahid, Masrur Morshed, Colwell, John,
Gazit, Oz, Puniredd, Sreenivasa Reddy, McNeill, Christopher, Sonar,
Prashant, & Haick, Hossam
(2016)
A highly sensitive diketopyrrolopyrrole-based ambipolar transistor for selective detection and discrimination of xylene isomers.
Advanced Materials, 28(21), pp. 4012-4018.
This file was downloaded from: https://eprints.qut.edu.au/221871/
© Consult author(s) regarding copyright matters
This work is covered by copyright. Unless the document is being made available under a
Creative Commons Licence, you must assume that re-use is limited to personal use and
that permission from the copyright owner must be obtained for all other uses. If the document is available under a Creative Commons License (or other specified license) then refer
to the Licence for details of permitted re-use. It is a condition of access that users recognise and abide by the legal requirements associated with these rights. If you believe that
this work infringes copyright please provide details by email to qut.copyright@qut.edu.au
Notice: Please note that this document may not be the Version of Record
(i.e. published version) of the work. Author manuscript versions (as Submitted for peer review or as Accepted for publication after peer review) can
be identified by an absence of publisher branding and/or typeset appearance. If there is any doubt, please refer to the published source.
https://doi.org/10.1002/adma.201505641

 1
DOI: 10.1002/adma.(please add manuscript number)
Highly Sensitive Ambipolar Field Effect Transistor-Based Diketopyrrolopyrrole
Copolymer for Selective Detection and Discrimination of Xylene Isomers
Bin Wang, Tan-Phat Huynh, Weiwei Wu, Naseem Hayek, Thu Trang Do, John C. Cancilla,
Jose S. Torrecilla, Masrur Morshed Nahid, John M. Colwell, Oz M. Gazit, Sreenivasa Reddy
Puniredd, Christopher R. McNeill, Prashant Sonar,* and Hossam Haick*
Dr. Bin Wang, Dr. Tan-Phat Huynh, Dr. Weiwei Wu, Naseem Hayek, Prof. Oz M. Gazit,
Prof. Hossam Haick
Department of Chemical Engineering and Russell Berrie Nanotechnology Institute,
Technion-Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa 3200003, Israel.
E-mail: hhossam@technion.ac.il
John C. Cancilla, Prof. Jose S. Torrecilla
Department of Chemical Engineering,
Complutense University of Madrid,
Madrid 28040, Spain
Masrur Morshed Nahid, Prof. Christopher R. McNeill
Department of Materials Science and Engineering,
Monash University, Clayton, Victoria 3800, Australia
Dr. Sreenivasa Reddy Puniredd
Institute of Materials Research and Engineering (IMRE), Agency for Science, Technology
and Research (A*STAR), 2 Fusionopolis Way, Innovis, Singapore 138634.
Thu Trang Do, Dr. John M. Colwell, Prof. Prashant Sonar
School of Chemistry, Physics and Mechanical Engineering,
Queensland University of Technology (QUT),
4001 Brisbane, Australia
E-mail: sonar.prashant@qut.edu.au
Keywords: Ambipolar, field effect transistor, sensor, isomer, diketopyrrolopyrrole.

 2
Xylenes, which include 3 isomers, i.e. p-xylene, o-xylene, and m-xylene, are important
petrochemicals.[1] Individual and mixed xylene isomers are widely used as chemical
intermediates to make polyesters and as solvents in printing, rubber, and leather industries
as well as in household products (aerosol paints and lacquers).[1] Volatilization of xylenes in
air can impair the human respiratory system, the central nervous system, liver, kidneys, eyes
and skin.[2] The U.S. National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH)
recommended long- and short-term exposure limits for xylenes of 100 and 150 ppm,
respectively.[2a] Though xylene isomers have similar structural and physical properties, they
have different industrial applications.[1] The 3 xylene isomers are metabolized by different
pathways in the body.[3] Hence, the detection and discrimination of xylene isomers is
essential in environmental monitoring and healthcare.[2-3]
In principle, high-resolution gas chromatography (HRGC) can be used to detect and
discriminate xylene isomers.[4] However, it requires expensive equipment and well-trained
operators, making HRGC-MS unsuitable for environmental monitoring. A number of methods,
including mass sensor arrays,[5] chemiresistor sensor arrays,[6] metal oxide semiconductor
based sensors[7] and cataluminescence sensor arrays,[8] have been developed for costeffective detection of xylene isomers. Although selective detection has been achieved with
arrays of sensors, their detection limits are always very high (e.g. 104 ppm, 103
 ppm, and 400
ppm as reported in references.7c, 5 and 6, respectively). Five ppm p-xylene has been
detected using cobalt-doped zinc oxide nanowire-based sensors.[7b] However, such metal
oxide semiconductor-based sensors only work at a relatively high temperature (>400ºC) and
no selectivity regarding the other isomers of xylenes has been reported for these sensors.
Therefore, detection of xylene isomers with high selectivity and sensitivity below the health
threshold level of 100 ppm remains a significant challenge. A reliable selective sensor for the
detection of mixed xylene isomers, widely used as solvents in the chemical industry, is
lacking.
We here report an ambipolar diketopyrrolopyrrole (DPP) copolymer field effect
transistor (FET)-based sensor to selectively and sensitively detect xylene isomers at 40 ppm,
which is below the NIOSH long-term exposure limit for xylene isomers. The rationale behind
this approach is that an ambipolar FET that can operate alternatively in n-channel and pchannel modes has been adopted for the generation of double-sensing parameters in hole
and electron changes rather than using a unipolar FETs.[9] Therefore, it is reasonable that an
ambipolar FET sensor would provide more degrees of freedom to enhance the selective
detection of structurally highly similar chemicals, e.g. between isomers. Indeed, by combining
multiple sensing parameters derived from hole and electron effects obtained from the one
ambipolar FET with a pattern recognition algorithm, chemical fingerprints for each of the
xylene isomers can be taken that allow clear discrimination between structurally similar

 3
isomers. The ambipolar FET sensor can also selectively detect solvents of binary and ternary
o-, p-, and m- xylene mixtures at different ratios via vapor sensing.
An alternating copolymer, poly(diketopyrrolopyrrole-terthiophene) referred to as
PDPPHD-T3 (Figure 1a), was synthesized by Stille coupling, using hexyldecyl substituted
thiophene flanked DPP with thiophene as previously reported.[10] Polymer characterization
data can be found in Supporting Information Figure S1-5. A long alkyl, hexyldecyl, chain was
attached to the DPP block to help the processing of a solution of the polymer. The
conjugated main chains of PDPPHD-T3 probably have a high affinity for aromatic xylene
isomers. Figure 1b shows a Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM) image of the spin-coated
PDPPHD-T3 film between source and drain electrodes. It is apparent that the PDPPHD-T3
chains have self-assembled into nano-fibrillar structure of average diameter 34 nm. This
structure has a large surface-to-volume ratio, creating a large area suitable for adsorption of
molecules. The film structure has also been examined by grazing-incidence wide-angle X-ray
scattering (GIWAXS). The peak at q ~1.7 Å-1 (most prominent in the out-of-plane trace)
corresponds to the - stacking of polymer backbones with a 0.37 nm d-spacing (Figure 1c).
The peak located at q ~0.34 Å-1 (most prominent in the in-plane trace) corresponds to the
alkyl stacking of polymer chains with a 1.85 nm d-spacing. The corresponding 2-dimensional
scattering image is shown in Figure S6 in the Supporting Information. Considering the
molecular size of the xylene isomers (Table 1), we consider that the xylene isomers diffuse
into the PDPPHD-T3 crystallites, especially between their side-chains. The representative
example in Figure 1d shows the source-drain current (Ids) vs gate voltage (Vg) curves of the
PDPPHD-T3 polymer FET under N2. The polymer FET shows a typical V-sharp ambipolar
transfer character; notably, the conductive channel can transport both electron and hole
charge carriers. FET parameters for both electron and hole transport, such as electron
mobility (µe), hole mobility (µh), electron threshold voltage (Vth-e), hole threshold voltage (Vth-h),
electron subthreshold swing (SSe) and hole subthreshold swing (SSh), can be calculated from
the linear and logarithmic Ids-Vg plots and also used as sensing parameters for xylene
exposure (details of FET parameter calculations can be found in the Supporting Information).
The calculated hole mobility, hole threshold voltage, electron mobility and threshold voltages
of PDPPHD-T3 FET under N2 are 0.125 cm2
/(V.s), -13.9 V, 0.027 cm2
/(V.s) and 4.48 V,
respectively.

 4
Figure 1. (a) Schema of the synthesis of PDPPHD-T3. (b) SEM image of a spin-coated
PDPPHD-T3 film on octadecyltrichlorosilane (OTS)-treated SiO2/Si. (c) In-plane and out-ofplane GIWAXS profiles of a PDPPHD-T3 film. (d) Typical linear and logarithmic scale Ids-Vg
curves of a PDPPHD-T3 FET under N2. Inset: Schematic image of a PDPPHD-T3 FET
device. The polymer FET was measured in hole accumulation mode.
Table 1. Physical properties of xylene isomers
Xylene
isomers
Chemical
structure
Boiling
point [°C]
Vapor
pressure
[mmHg]
Dipole
moment
[D]
Kinetic
diameter
[mm]
o-xylene 144.4 7 0.64 0.65
m-xylene 139 9 0.37 0.64
p-xylene 138.35 9 0.07 0.58

 5
Based on the measured Ids-Vg curves, multiple sensing parameters, changes in: hole
voltage threshold, ∆Vth-h, hole mobility, ∆µh/µhb, hole subthreshold swing, ∆SSh, electron
voltage threshold, ∆Vth-e, electron mobility, ∆µe/µeb, and electron subthreshold swing and
∆SSe were calculated and plotted as a function of time (Figure 2a-f). The sensing responses
in N2 flow were set as a baseline, and those towards xylene exposure are reflected in the
change of Ids. As an example, the change of Ids at Vg = 10 V has been plotted in Figure S7.
The PDPPHD-T3 FET sensor responded to all 3 isomers of xylene over a wide concentration
range using all 6 selected sensing features. Note that the PDPPHD-T3 FET sensor could
detect xylene isomers down to 40 ppm, lower than he NIOSH recommended long-term
exposure limit of 100 ppm for xylenes. With increasing xylene concentration, the absolute
values of the sensing responses increased. Most of the sensing parameters reverted to near
baseline levels after 5 min exposure to a pure N2 flow. The 6 sensing parameters have
different responses towards xylene exposure; specifically, ∆Vth-e and ∆Vth-h both gave a
positive response to xylene isomers, whereas ∆µe/µeb, ∆µh/µhb, ∆SSe and ∆SSh gave a
negative response. For the same concentration of xylene isomers, the sensing features gave
similar, but variable responses. For example, ∆µe/µeb at 40 ppm gave similar responses for oxylene and m-xylene (µe decreased by 3.7 ± 0.3% and 3.6 ± 0.3%, respectively), but differed
for p-xylene (µe decreased by 4.3 ± 0.2%). While ∆µh/µhb gave similar responses to o-xylene
and p-xylene (µh decreased by 0.55 ± 0.05% and 0.56 ± 0.06%, respectively), they differ from
m-xylene (µh decreased by 0.47 ± 0.1%). The differences in multiple sensing responses can
discriminate structurally similar xylene isomers from one another.

 6
Figure 2. Time-dependent responses as expressed by: (a) ∆Vth-e, (b) ∆µe/µeb, (c) ∆SSe, (d)
∆Vth-h, (e) ∆µh/µhb, and (f) ∆SSh of a PDPPHD-T3 FET after exposure to different xylene
isomer vapors at varying concentrations. PCA score plots for the 3 xylene isomers at 40 ppm.
(g) 6 sensing parameters (∆Vth-h, ∆Vth-e, ∆µh/µhb, ∆µe/µeb, ∆SSh, and ∆SSe) obtained by one
PDPPHD-T3 sensor were used. (h) Only electron response parameters (∆Vth-e, ∆µe/µeb, and
∆SSe) were used. (i) Only hole response parameters (∆Vth-h, ∆µh/µhb, and ∆SSh) were used.
(j) Euclidean distance of ANN outputs using a sole PDPPHD-T3 ambipolar FET sensor to
identify o-xylene, m-xylene, p-xylene, and their binary and ternary mixture solvents.
Encouraged by the nature of the human olfactory system, where arrays of crossreactive chemical sensors conjugated with pattern recognition methods can achieve selective
sensing of analytes,[11] the multiple sensing responses of PDPPHD-T3 FET can be used to
provide a fingerprint of each xylene isomer. By this approach, the device features extracted
from the PDPPHD-T3 FET serve as an array of 6 virtual sensors, where each has its own
cross-reactive behavior towards a specific isomer or mixture of isomers. Figure 2g shows
the principle component analysis (PCA) plot of PDPPHD-T3 FET with 6 sensing parameters
in response to different xylene isomers at a concentration of 40 ppm. Figure 2g shows each
of the structurally similar xylene isomer can be clearly distinguished from the others by
forming well-separated clusters in the principle component space. Note that the selective

 7
detection of structurally similar xylene isomers is achieved with a single PDPPHD-T3 FET
sensor rather than arrays of sensors.[5, 8, 12] Furthermore, PCA was analyzed using either only
electron or hole sensing parameters (Figure 2h and Figure 2i, respectively). The use of only
the electron sensing parameters results in a clear clustering of 3 xylene isomers. However, if
only hole sensing parameters were used for the PCA analysis, o-xylene can be clearly
distinguished from p-xylene and m-xylene, but p-xylene and m-xylene are misclassified.
Linear discriminant analysis (LDA) also used to discriminate between xylene isomers showed
that they can be successfully classified with 100% sensitivity, specificity and accuracy in
most cases, even when only 2 sensing features of a sole ambipolar FET sensor had been
used (Table S1). Statistically differences (p-values) between canonical variables of the
different xylene isomer classes were estimated by Student’s t-test, all being <0.0001 (p<0.05
being accepted as significant).
PDPPHD-T3-coated quartz crystal microbalance (QCM) measurements (see
Supporting Information) showed increased mass after xylene exposure, suggesting that
xylene molecules diffused and adsorbed onto the polymer film (Figure S8). The QCM sensor
recorded a very similar mass increase with the 3 xylene isomers at the same concentration,
suggesting that PDPPHD-T3 has no appreciable selective adsorption. Therefore, it can be
inferred that the selective detection of xylene isomers is based mainly on their different
impacts on the electronic properties of PDPPHD-T3.
After xylene exposure, the amount of adsorption on the polymer film increased rapidly
over the first 8 seconds, corresponding to the diffusion and adsorption of molecules into the
shallow space of polymer film. Then the mass of xylene increased slowly, corresponding to
their adsorption into the deep space of polymer film. Much more xylene accumulates on the
shallow space than the deep space. Thus sensing responses are largely due to adsorption in
the shallow space. It takes 12 seconds in our FET sensor for one measurement, which is
longer than the time taken for xylene molecules diffusing into the shallow space of polymer
film. The adsorption equilibrium of xylene on the polymer film controls the sensing response.
Therefore, the sensing processing is mainly limited by adsorption thermodynamics rather
than by diffusion.
The 3 xylene isomers are miscible with each other in any ratio because of their similar
physical properties, and mixed xylenes are widely used in industry. To selectively detect
xylene mixtures (cocktails), an artificial neural network (ANN)-based model was used. Six
sensing parameters of a sole PDPPHD-T3 sensor towards 10 xylene mixtures (the
components of the mixed xylene are listed in Table S2) were set as the input layer of the
ANN. The contents of o-, m-, and p-xylenes in mixtures ranging from 0 to 1 were set as the
output layer. The Euclidean distance between the estimated and real values was used to
evaluate the discriminatory power of the sensor. Figure 2j shows all calculated Euclidean

 8
distances to be below 0.1, showing that the ANN model can correctly distinguish between 10
xylene mixtures.
To understand the positive and negative responses achieved by the PDPPHD-T3
FET sensor, Density Functional Theory (DFT) was used on a DPPHD-T3 dimer, i.e. a
fragment of PDPPHD-T3, and its complexes with xylene isomers by applying the B3LYP/6-
311+G* calculation. The optimized geometries of p-xylene, o-xylene and m-xylene adsorbed
onto DPPHD-T3 dimers are shown in Figure 3. All electron deficient xylene isomers are
adsorbed on the electron-rich thiophene units due to donor-acceptor and van der Waal’s
interactions. The different methyl substitution positions in the benzene ring produce different
molecular symmetries and electron density distribution of the isomers, and thus the
optimized position of xylene isomers on PDPPHD-T3 differ from each other.
In general, for an ambipolar FET, the metal electrode Fermi level (EF) is located
between the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) and lowest unoccupied molecular
orbital (LUMO). The energy difference between the metal electrode EF and the HOMO and
LUMO levels leads to the formation of hole and electron injection barriers, respectively,
which affects their injection rates.[13] DFT-calculated HOMO and LUMO energies of the
DPPHD-T3 dimer before and after the adsorption of xylene isomers are given in Table 2 and
the corresponding molecular orbitals have been plotted in Figure S9. After adsorbing xylene
isomers, the HOMO and LUMO energies of the DPPHD-T3 dimer all increase, resulting in a
decrease in the hole injection barrier and increase in the electron injection barrier (Figure
3d). When the PDPPHD-T3 FET is operated in hole accumulation mode (Vg sweeps from a
positive to a negative voltage), a decrease in the hole injection barrier will make the hole
conduction channel open at a higher positive gate voltage, while an increase in the electron
injection barrier will make the electron conduction channel close at a more positive gate
voltage. As a result, the Vth_e and Vth_h will shift to a higher positive gate voltage after xylene
exposure. These results are agree with the experimental sensing response of PDPPHD-T3
to xylene isomers (Figure 2a and Figure 2d). The different xylene isomers have different
impacts on the HOMO/LUMO energies of PDPPHD-T3. These differences lead to differences
in the polymer FET multiple transfer properties that result in distinct sensing patterns for the
selective sensing of structurally similar xylene isomers. Note that the DFT calculations are
based on the molecule in vacuum and omit the interaction between polymer chains to
simplify the calculation. In the real polymer film, xylene adsorption-induced changes of
polymer electric properties are more complex and are also affected by molecular aggregation
of the polymers. Nevertheless, DFT calculation can be used to explain the trend of xylene
adsorption-induced changes of polymer electric properties.
To support the results from DFT calculation, complexes of PDPPHD-T3 polymer and
xylene isomers can be experimentally seen in peak shifts in IR spectrum of the PDPPHD-T3

 9
film. Figure S10a is the IR spectrum of the drop-cast PDPPHD-T3 film measured under
Argon flow. Stretching vibrations of the aryl ketone C=O and C-N bonds of
diketopyrrolopyrrole occur at 1673 and 1220 cm-1. Peaks at 2922 and 2853 cm-1 are
stretching vibrations of CH3 and CH2 of the hexyldecyl ligand of diketopyrrolopyrrole. Peaks
at 1566 and 1445 cm-1 correspond to asymmetric and symmetric C=C stretching vibrations,
respectively, whereas those at 1335 cm-1 to C-C stretching vibrations in the thiophene ring. A
peak at 3064 cm-1 is due to the stretching vibrations of C-H of the aromatic rings.[14] As
predicted, after exposure to different xylene isomers, more than half of the peaks of
PDPPHD-T3 (marked in bold and violet color in Figure S10) had shifted (Figure S10a-c).
For instances, stretching vibrations of aryl ketone C=O (1673 cm-1), asymmetric and
symmetric C=C (1566, 1445 cm-1), C-N bond (1220 cm-1), and C-C (1335 cm-1) of PDPPHDT3 polymer all shifted to lower wavenumber at 7 to 15 cm-1. This is evidence of interaction
between xylene isomers and the polymer backbone. However, stretching vibrations of the
CH2 peak of hexyldecyl ligand shifted from 2922 cm-1 to a higher wavenumber at 9 to 11 cm-1
due to Van Der Waal’s interaction between hexyldecyl ligand and xylene. Moreover, the
interaction between xylene and PDPPHD-T3 polymer is reversible because the peak shifts
back to its original position during the desorption step, i.e. xylene flushed out by argon flow
(Figure S11).
The PDPPHD-T3 polymer film is also swollen by the diffusion of xylenes. Specifically,
xylene-induced polymer film swelling will result in less-tightly packed PDPPHD-T3 nanofibres,
as also a decrease the order of polymer chain packing, resulting in an increase in film
resistance. Therefore, both the electron and hole mobility of the PDPPHD-T3 polymer film
will decrease after xylene exposure, as was seen in the xylene exposure experiments
(Figure 2c and e).

 10
Figure 3. Electron density distribution in the DPPHD-T3 dimer with (a) o-xylene, (b) m-xylene,
and (c) p-xylene, optimized by the B3LYP density functional theory method using the 6-
311+G* basis set. (d) Schematic diagram of the change in hole/electron injection barriers
between a metal electrode and the ambipolar polymer due to xylene adsorption.
Table 2. HOMO, LUMO, and band gap energies (eV) of the DPPHD-T3 dimer and their
complexes with different xylene isomers
 DPPHD-T3
dimer
DPPHD-T3
dimer + pxylene
DPPHD-T3
dimer + mxylene
DPPHD-T3
dimer + oxylene
LUMO -3.138 -3.105 -3.097 -3.108
HOMO -5.007 -4.947 -4.968 -4.961
In summary, we have developed an FET sensor based on an ambipolar semiconducting polymer to detect xylene isomer vapors at 40 ppm, i.e. below the long-term
permissible exposure limit of 100 ppm recommended by NIOSH. The ambipolar FET
generates multiple sensing parameters in electron and hole conduction towards xylene
isomers. Using a combined pattern recognition method along with multiple sensing

 11
parameters from a single ambipolar FET, chemically and structurally similar xylene isomers,
as well as binary and ternary xylene mixtures, can be precisely identified. The sensing
mechanism was investigated by DFT calculations showing that both HOMO and LUMO
energy levels of the polymer increase with the amount of adsorbed xylene isomer. As a result,
the hole injection barriers of the ambipolar FET decreases, facilitating hole transport,
whereas the electron injection barriers increase, suppressing electron transport. Complexes
of PDPPHD-T3 polymer and xylene isomers have been experimentally monitored by FTIR.
Electrical properties are also affected by the swelling of the polymer film due to xylene
diffusion. Our investigations could lead to the development of cost-effective and low-power
sensors for sensitive and selective detection of structurally similar chemicals and their
mixtures.
Experimental Section
FET Sensor Fabrication: PDPPHD-T3 FETs were prepared on (100) silicon wafers capped
with 300 nm thermal oxide. Ti/Au (10/200 nm) bottom gate electrode was deposited by
electron beam evaporation. Forty-nine pairs of circular interdigitated source and drain Au
(200 nm) electrodes were prepared using photolithography and electron-beam evaporation.
The outer diameter of the circular electrode area was 3000 μm, and the gap between the 2
adjacent electrodes, the width of each electrode being 25 and 5 μm, respectively. The silicon
wafers were treated on oxygen plasma for 5 min. The silicon wafers were immersed in
octyltrichlorosilane (OTS) in toluene (40 mM, 20mL) for 10 h in N2 glove-box. Finally,
PDPPHD-T3 films were deposited on the OTS-treated substrates by spin-coating using a
PDPPHD-T3 solution (8 mg/mL) in chloroform. The polymer film thickness was ~320 nm
measured by a step profiler. The surface morphology of spin-coated PDPPHD-T3 film was
characterized by scanning electron microscopy (Zeiss Ultra-Plus FEG-SEM).
FET Sensor Measurements: PDPPHD-T3 FET sensor was loaded into a stainless steel
chamber with ~170 cm3
 volume. The vapors of o-, m-, and p-xylenes were produced by a
computer-controlled bubbler system. N2 was used as a carrier gas as well as a reference gas.
The flow rate was kept at 3L/min during the experiment. Xylene mixtures were prepared by
mixing liquids of pure o-, m-, and p-xylenes at selected (volume) ratios (Table S1). Vapor
concentrations of xylene mixtures were set as Pa/Po = 0.05, where Pa and Po stand for the
xylene mixture VOC's partial pressure and saturated vapor pressure, respectively. Sourcedrain current (Ids) versus gate voltage (Vg) measurements (swept between 10 and -60 V with
0.5 V steps and-70 V constant source-drain voltage, Vds) were carried out using a Keithley
2636A system SourceMeter and 3706 system Switch/Multimeter.

 12
Computational Methods: Gaussian 09 soft was used to calculate the molecular structure, the
highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) and lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO)
energy of formation of complexes of PDPPHD-T3 with each xylene isomer, using a DFT
method at the B3LYP/6-311+G* level.
Pattern Recognition Methods: Principle component analysis (PCA) and linear discriminant
analysis (LDA) for xylene isomers used JMP 10 software (SAS Institute Inc.). PCA finds
projection weights for sensor response data that maximize total response variance in
principal components, where dimension capturing greatest variance is given by PC1, and the
dimension capturing the second greatest variance (subject to being orthogonal to PC1) is
given by PC2, etc. LDA finds linear combinations of sensing features that separate 2 or more
classes of objects. In binary classification, LDA predicts membership in 2 categories based
on known continuous sensing responses.
Artificial Neural Networks: A feed-forward 3-layered multilayer perceptron (input, hidden, and
output) ANN model was used for the classification of xylene mixtures. The 6 sensing
parameters of each xylene mixture at a vapor concentration of Pa/Po = 0.05 were set as the
input nodes of the ANN. The 3 xylene isomers were encoded with dependent vectors in a 3-
dimensional space and were set as the 3 neurons in the output layer. The ranges of the
vector lengths of the 3 xylene isomers were set from 0 to 1, corresponding to the content of a
determined isomer in the xylene mixtures. A vector length equal to 0 means that a specific
isomer in the xylene mixture absent, while a vector length equal to 1 means the detected
mixture contains only one xylene isomer. The database obtained from a sole PDPPHD-T3
sensor was randomly split into 2 datasets, the learning dataset and the verification dataset.
The Euclidean distance between the estimated and the real vector was used to calculate the
discriminatory power of the PHPPHD–T3 sensor towards the mixed xylenes. Optimized ANN
parameters and functions are listed in Table S3.
Supporting Information
Supporting Information is available from the Wiley Online Library or the author.
Acknowledgements
This research received funding from the Horizon 2020 ICT Program under the SNIFFPHONE
(grant agreement no. 644031). The authors acknowledge the Israel Council for Higher
Education for a partial support of Bin Wang's postdoctoral fellowship. The authors are
grateful to Yi Ren for his help in Matlab programing, Dr. Linfeng Chen for his help in SEM
measurements and Dr. Guankui Long for profound discussions on DFT calculations. C.R.M.
acknowledges support from the Australian Research Council (DP130102616). Part of this

 13
research was undertaken on the SAXS/WAXS beamline at the Australian Synchrotron,
Victoria, Australia. C.R.M. and M.M.N. thank Dr. Eliot Gann for assistance with GIWAXS
measurements and data analysis. Thu Trang Do, John Colwell and Prashant Sonar wish to
thank the CRC for Polymers at Queensland University of Technology (QUT) for equipment
support. Prashant also acknowledges financial support from the Australian Research Council
(FT130101337).
Received: ((will be filled in by the editorial staff))
Revised: ((will be filled in by the editorial staff))
Published online: ((will be filled in by the editorial staff))
References:
[1] J. Fabri, U. Graeser, T. A. Simo, in Ullmann's Encyclopedia of Industrial Chemistry,
Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, 2000, 643.
[2] a) The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health, NIOSH Pocket Guide to
Chemical Hazards, http://www.cdc.gov/niosh/npg/npgd0669.html, accessed: October,
2015; b) Agency for Toxic Substances & Disease Registry, Toxicological Profile for
Xylene, http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/ToxProfiles/tp.asp?id=296&tid=53, accessed:
October, 2015.
[3] C. Morton, Handbook of Hazardous Materials, 1st Edition ed., Academic Press, Inc.,
San Diego, California, USA, 1993.
[4] a) Z. Y. Gu, X. P. Yan, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2010, 49, 1477; b) Z. Y. Gu, X. P. Yan,
Angew. Chem. 2010, 122, 1519.
[5] F. L. Dickert, O. Hayden, M. E. Zenkel, Anal. Chem. 1999, 71, 1338.
[6] a) F. Wang, Y. Yang, T. M. Swager, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2008, 47, 8394; b) F.
Wang, Y. Yang, T. M. Swager, Angew. Chem. 2008, 120, 8522.
[7] a) H. J. Kim, J. W. Yoon, K. I. Choi, H. W. Jang, A. Umar, J. H. Lee, Nanoscale 2013,
5, 7066; b) H. S. Woo, C. H. Kwak, J. H. Chung, J. H. Lee, ACS Appl. Mater.
Interfaces 2014, 6, 22553; c) S. C. Hernandez, C. M. Hangarter, A. Mulchandani, N.
V. Myung, Analyst 2012, 137, 2549.
[8] S. F. Li, J. Z. Zheng, W. X. Zhang, J. Cao, S. X. Li, Z. M. Rao, Analyst 2013, 138, 916.
[9] a) Y. N. Li, P. Sonar, L. Murphy, W. Hong, Energy Environ. Sci. 2013, 6, 1684; b) P.
Sonar, S. P. Singh, Y. N. Li, M. S. Soh, A. Dodabalapur, Adv. Mater. 2010, 22, 5409;
c) Z. R. Yi, S. Wang, Y. Q. Liu, Adv. Mater. 2015, 27, 3589.

 14
[10] a) J. C. Bijleveld, A. P. Zoombelt, S. G. J. Mathijssen, M. M. Wienk, M. Turbiez, D. M.
de Leeuw, R. A. J. Janssen, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2009, 131, 16616; b) J. S. Lee, S. K.
Son, S. Song, H. Kim, D. R. Lee, K. Kim, M. J. Ko, D. H. Choi, B. S. Kim, J. H. Cho,
Chem. Mater. 2012, 24, 1316.
[11] a) S. Stewart, M. A. Ivy, E. V. Anslyn, Chem. Soc. Rev. 2014, 43, 70; b) B. Wang, J.
C. Cancilla, J. S. Torrecilla, H. Haick, Nano Lett. 2014, 14, 933.
[12] M. C. Janzen, J. B. Ponder, D. P. Bailey, C. K. Ingison, K. S. Suslick, Anal. Chem.
2006, 78, 3591.
[13] a) A. Facchetti, M. Mushrush, M. H. Yoon, G. R. Hutchison, M. A. Ratner, T. J. Marks,
J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2004, 126, 13859; b) H. Usta, C. Risko, Z. Wang, H. Huang, M. K.
Deliomeroglu, A. Zhukhovitskiy, A. Facchetti, T. J. Marks, J Am. Chem. Soc. 2009,
131, 5586.
[14] a) X. Zhang, L. J. Richter, D. M. DeLongchamp, R. J. Kline, a. R. Hammond, I.
McCulloch, M. Heeney, R. S. Ashraf, J. N. Smith, T. D. Anthopoulos, B. Schroeder, Y.
H. Geerts, D. A. Fischer, M. F. Toney, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2011, 133, 15073; b) R. M.
Silverstein, F. X. Webster, D. J. Kiemle, Spectrometric Identification of Organic
Compounds, John Wiley & Sons New Jersey, USA 2005.

 15
The table of contents entry: An ambipolar poly(diketopyrrolopyrrole-terthiophene)
(PDPPHD-T3)-based field effect transistor (FET) sensitively detects xylene isomers at low to
40 ppm levels in multiple sensing features. Combined with pattern recognition algorithms, a
sole ambipolar FET sensor rather than arrays of sensors can discriminate highly similar
xylene structural isomers from one another.
Keywords: semiconducting polymer, ambipolar field effect transistor, sensor, isomer,
diketopyrrolopyrrole
Title: A Multi-sensing Parameter Ambipolar Field Effect Transistor for the Detection and
Discrimination of Xylene Isomers
Bin Wang, Tan-Phat Huynh, Weiwei Wu, Thu Trang Do, John C. Cancilla, Jose S. Torrecilla,
Masrur Morshed Nahid, John Colwell, Sreenivasa Reddy Puniredd, Christopher R. McNeill,
Prashant Sonar,* and Hossam Haick*
ToC figure (55 mm broad, 50 mm high, or 110 mm broad, 20 mm high)) 