Super Nernstian pH response and enzyme-free detection of glucose using sol-gel derived RuOx on PET flexible-based extended-gate field-effect transistor
Author links open overlay panel
Kanishk Singh a
, 
Bih-Show Lou b c
, 
Jim-Long Her d
, 
See-Tong Pang e
, Tung-Ming Pan a e

Show more

Add to Mendeley

Share

Cite
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.snb.2019.126837
Get rights and content
Full text access
Highlights
•
Sol-gel derived an amorphous RuOx on PET flexible based EGFET was fabricated at low processing temperature.
•
RuOx EGFET sensor exhibited the super-Nernstian pH sensitivity, a low hysteresis voltage, and a small of drift rate.
•
4-CPBA functionalized RuOx EGFET sensor showed a glucose sensitivity of 6.89 mV/mM.
Abstract
In this paper, we fabricated a sol-gel derived RuOx, with low-temperature thermal oxidation, on polyethylene terephthalate (PET) flexible based extended-gate field-effect transistor (EGFET) as a pH sensor for the assessment of glucose for the first time. Structural identification, surface morphology, and film composition of the sensing membrane were investigated by X-ray diffraction, atomic force microscopy, and X-ray photoelectron microscopy, respectively. The RuOx on PET based EGFET sensor exhibited a pH sensitivity of 65.11 mV/pH in the wide range of pH 2–12 with an excellent linearity of 0.999. This sensor showed good reversibility in terms of a lower hysteresis voltage of ∼1 mV and a better stability for 12 h named as drift rate ∼2.08 mV/h. The RuOx-based EGFET sensor also demonstrated a high selective response towards H+. In addition, the pH performace of this RuOx EGFET flexible sensor kept unchanged after 500 repeated bending cycles. Subsequently, the RuOx on PET based EGFET was functionalized by 4-carboxyphenyl boronic acid (4-CPBA), which is a synthetic receptor for covalent attachment of glucose on the sensing surface. The sensitivity of glucose was 6.89 mV/mM with the linearity of 0.993 within the glucose concentration from 1 to 8 mM. The concentration of serum glucose measured by our 4-CPBA functionalized RuOx EGFET biosensor is comparable to that determined by commercial blood glucose monitoring system. In addition, this RuOx EGFET biosensor exhibited an elevated reference voltage shift response to glucose compared with other saccharides (e.g. fructose, sucrose and mannose).
Previous article
Next article
Keywords
RuOxPET flexibleExtended-gate field-effect transistor (EGFET)Super-NernstianGlucose detection
1. Introduction
In the last few decades, a large population in the world suffering from diabetes mellitus (DM) and its related complexities. It is a chronic disease which is the leading cause of death in many countries [1]. In the DM medical condition, the β-cell of pancreas does not produce an adequate amount of insulin which is important for the metabolism of glucose. Due to the insulin deficiency, the level of blood glucose becomes constantly high from the normal range <100 mg/dL (5.56 mM) or 100–125 mg/dL (5.56–6.94 mM) [2]. The major risk factor in a DM patient, which is a higher blood glucose, has a deleterious effect on the proper functioning of multiple vital organs (such as heart, kidney, eyes, brain), causing other mortality induced health complications, like inflammation and fibrotic change in lungs [3,4]. In order to avoid or manage these major complications related to DM, a comprehensive and continuous monitoring of blood glucose level are a very essential criterion. Since the innovation of biosensor, a variety of biosensors have been frequently reported for detection of glucose, e.g. electrochemical [5], capacitive [6], fiber optic [7], microcantilever [8]. The performance and sensitivity towards the detection of glucose by these various kinds of biosensors depend on the immobilization of glucose oxidase (GOx) enzyme. However, a considerable issue associated with the enzyme immobilization could be diminished the possibility of application of these sensors as a commercial medical diagnostic tool. The major disadvantages for immobilization of enzyme are that the change in the pH and temperature affects the stability and activity of the enzyme, increasing additional bearing on cost, required complex chemical procedure and diffusing substrate to have an access to enzyme [9]. To overcome these enzymes related complexities, in recent years there has been an increasing interest in the development of conductive metal-oxide based non-enzymatic glucose biosensors, including CuO [10], ZnO/CuO nanorods [11], Co3O4 [12], NiO [13]. However, biocompatibility issue, poor selectivity, low glucose detection range, and reduced sensitivity over a period of time are major obstacles for the implementation of these biosensors for the real-time measurements [14]. Field-effect transistor (FET) based biosensor offers an effective paradigm for quantification of various biological analytes. The receptor-ligand interaction on the transducer surface facilitates the modulation of source-drain channel conductivity related to the electric field of the environment. Moreover, the shift in drain current corresponds to the concentration of target biomolecule in a human body fluid [15]. The construction of ion-sensitive field-effect transistor (ISFET) was derived from metal-oxide-semiconductor field-effect transistor (MOSFET), where the metal gate was replaced by a reference electrode and an electrolyte solution. However, the sensing membrane of ISFET continuously submerged in the electrolyte solution which results in the degradation of its stability for long-term operation. In order to conquer this drawback, the extended-gate field-effect transistor (EGFET) was invented in 1983 [16], which belongs to the ISFET family. In EGFET based sensor, the sensing membrane part is isolated from MOSFET and submerged in an electrolyte solution. With such type of arrangement, the MOSFET part can be used multiple times in a dry environment. The principle of sensing mechanism for EGFET- and ISFET-based potentiometric sensor is common; however, the only difference is that EGFET operated at low impedance is compared to ISFET. Due to the modified structure, EGFET-based sensor provides several advantages such as low-cost fabrication, long-term stability, facile packaging, real-time detection, and improved sensitivity for biological molecules [17,18]. To date, EGFET-based sensors have been shown immense probability for label-free quantification of different biological molecules, e.g. α-synuclein (a Parkinson diseased biomarker), protein, urea, DNA [[19], [20], [21], [22]].
In recent few years, flexible substrate for the fabrication of biosensor has attracted immense attention for research community due to its potential for point of care (POC) diagnosis assays [23]. This substrate provides plausible advantages, including disposable, facile integration, miniaturization, inexpensive, biocompatible, easy to fabricate, and label-free detection. Various flexible substrates, such as polyethylene terephthalate (PET), polyimide/Kapton (PI), polypyrrole (PP), polyethylene naphthalate (PEN), have been widely utilized for the electrochemical mode of detection, e.g. FET, voltammetric, potentiometric [24]. The fundamental sensing mechanism of this substrate relies on the attachment of charge to determine biological elements, including DNA, antigen-antibody, pH, enzyme, on the electrolyte/sensing membrane interface [25]. The conductive metal oxides (e.g. ZnO, InGaZnO/Si nanowires, TiO2) [[26], [27], [28]] based sensing membrane are the preferable candidate as a sensing membrane for fabrication of EGFET-based sensor. Ruthenium oxide (RuO2) exhibited several advantages over the other metal-oxide sensing membranes due to its high sensitivity, excellent stability, high corrosion resistance, and reversible catalytic redox reaction between two oxidation states, thus making it a prospective candidate for fabrication of EGFET-based sensor [29,30]. The RuO2 sensing film deposited on flexible substrate by a sputtering process has been demonstrated for detection of urea and chloride [31,32], but this sensing film fabricated on PET flexible using a simple sol-gel spin-coating method is rarely reported for an EGFET sensor to detect glucose. In order to detect the glucose, phenylboronic acid derivative (PBA) acts as a synthetic receptor which has been frequently used for detection of 1, 2- and 1, 3-diol, polyol and catechol compounds [33,34]. The association between PBA and diol compound (glucose) is the covalent interaction which induces the formation of a reversible cyclic boronate ester complex [35].
The aim of this study is to fabricate the sol-gel derived RuOx sensing membrane on PET flexible as an EGFET biosensor for the first time. Furthermore, the RuOx-based EGFET sensor utilized for detection of pH and sensing of glucose through the covalent binding with phenylboronic acid derivatives on the sensing surface. X-ray diffraction (XRD), X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), and atomic force microscopy (AFM) were employed for the characterization of thin film structure, surface morphology, and chemical composition, respectively. In this article, The RuOx on PET based EGFET sensor exhibited a super-Nernstian pH response (65.11 mV/pH), a lower hysteresis voltage (∼1 mV) and a lower drift rate (∼2.08 mV/h). Moreover, this sensor provides an efficient platform for the enzyme-free detection of glucose by the formation of the reversible covalent complex (boronate ester) on the sensing surface.
2. Experimental
2.1. Materials and chemicals
Analytical grades of materials and chemicals were used in this research. Ruthenium (III) chloride hydrate (RuCl3·xH2O, MW: 225.44 g/mol, >99.9%) was purchased from Alfa Aesar. Indium tin oxide (ITO) coated PET (resistivity = 60 Ω/□), 3-aminopropyltriethoxysilane (APTES, 99%), 4-carboxyphenylboronic acid (4-CPBA), N-(3-dimethylaminopropyl)-N′-ethylcarbodiimide hydrochloride (EDC, >98%), N-hydroxysuccinimide (NHS, 98%), 2-(N-morpholino)ethane sulfonic acid hydrate (MES), 0.01 M phosphate buffer saline (PBS, pH 7.4), pH buffer solution (from pH 2 to 12), and other organic solvents (e.g. ethanol, acetone) were obtained from Sigma-Aldrich. Ultrapure deionized water with a resistivity of ∼18 MΩ purified by Mili-Q plus system (Millipore Co.) was used.
2.2. Preparation of RuOx sol-gel solution
In order to prepare a RuOx sol-gel solution, 415 mg of RuCl3·xH2O precursor molecule was dissolved in pure ethanol solvent to achieve the final concentration of 0.1 mol/L. This concentration of sol-gel solution would provide a better thickness of the film and ensure a proper adhesion on the ITO coated PET substrate. Further, the dark brown colloid was placed on the hot plate at 50 °C and stirred constantly for 3 h. To attain a stable homogeneous solution, lactic acid (1 ml) as a sol stabilizer was added to the solution. This sol-gel solution was kept at ambient temperature for 48 h for aging so as to acquire optimal viscosity during the deposition of the film.
2.3. Fabrication of sol-gel RuOx sensing membrane based EGFET sensor
The ITO coated PET was used for the fabrication of RuOx-based EGFET sensor. Prior to the spin coating process, the PET substrate with a dimension of 2 × 2 cm2 was employed as a biosensor platform. The substrate was first ultrasonically cleaned with acetone and then rinsed with the deionized water for 5 min, subsequently drying in an oven for 30 min at 100 °C to remove the moisture content from the surface. Afterward, this cleaned substrate was undergone for oxygen plasma treatment with a power of 30 W for 5 min to enhance the hydrophilic nature of the substrate, which provides a feasible spin coating condition. A ˜40 nm RuOx sensing membrane was deposited on the cleaned PET substrate by a spin coating speed of 4000 rpm for 30 s under suction. In order to remove the organic solvent and strengthen the adhesion of sensing film, the sample was soft baked at 90 °C in an oven for 60 min. The sensing region with a radius of 2 mm of the RuOx film was defined by using an epoxy resin which acts as a segregating layer. Subsequently, the sensing region was precisely cut from the native substrate and carefully mounted on the printed circuit board (PCB). A silver paste acting as a conductive line was employed to establish the connection between the sensing membrane and the Cu line. Finally, the non-sensing region of an EGFET sensor was encapsulated with an epoxy resin to prevent the leakage current, while exposed in the electrolyte solution. Fig. 1 represents the schematic diagram of the RuOx on PET flexible based EGFET and its measurement unit.
Fig. 1
Download: Download high-res image (268KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 1. (a) Schematic illustration of the RuOx on PET based EGFET sensor, (b) EGFET measurement unit and (c) the sol-gel derived RuOx sensing film fabricated on flexible PET substrate.

2.4. Surface functionalization
After the fabrication of RuOx on PET based EGEFT, the sensing area provides the platform for the biological interaction of glucose with the PBA derivative. For the functionalization scheme, first of all, APTES was deposited on the RuOx surface by a solvent evaporation method for 15 min at 85 °C in N2. Then, 10 μl solution of 1 mM 4-CPBA under the activation of 10 mM EDC and 10 mM NHS in 10 mM MES buffer (pH 6) was dropped on sensing region and kept for 4–5 h at room temperature. EDC and NHS were acted as activator to produce the carboxylic group. After the accomplishment of the functionalization procedure, the samples were rinsed with MES buffer and dried in N2 gas. Finally, the functionalized EGFET sensor can be used for the detection of glucose.
2.5. Electrical measurement and characterization
All electrical measurements of RuOx on PET based EGFET were performed by using precision semiconductor parameter analyzer (Agilent 4156 C). In this experiment, we used a commercial transistor device (CD4007UBE), which is basically a MOSFET part in EGFET. However, our sensing device works as an extended gate which is exposed in the electrolyte solution. The RuOx sensing membrane and Ag/AgCl were immersed in different pH buffer solutions (pH 2–12). All the pH sensing parameters (such as sensitivity, drift and hysteresis) were performed at 25 °C. For the detection of glucose, 10 mM PBS (pH 7.4) was used. In order to avoid optical interference, all measurements were performed in a dark box. To evaluate the sensing performance of the RuOx on PET based EGFET sensor, each experiment was repeated using three different devices.
The crystal structure and orientation of the RuOx films were carried out by a Rigaku D/MAX2000 XRD with a Cu Kα (λ = 1.54176 Å) line. The surface morphology and roughness of the RuOx films were observed using a Vecco D5000 AFM, with a silicon probe operated in tapping mode. The root-mean-square (Rrms) variation of the height values was calculated from 3 × 3 μm2 scan areas. The chemical bonding of the dielectric film was studied using a Physical Electronics Quantum 2000 XPS instrument equipped with a monochromatic Al Kα X-ray (1486.7 eV) source. The symmetric Gaussian–Lorentzian product functions were used to approximate the line shapes of the fitting components. Peak fitting was performed after Shirley background subtraction.
2.6. Bioanalyte preparation
In order to demonstrate the real time application of boronic acid modified RuOx sensing membrane, we performed the analysis of glucose in blood serum sample. Approximately 0.5 ml serum sample was diluted with 50% 10 mM PBS (pH 7.4) and stirred for 60 s. The total 5 ml sample volume was required to submerge the sensing area and reference electrode. Furthermore, the concentration of serum glucose was predetermined by commercial blood glucose monitoring system (OneTouch® Select Simple™) as a reference test [36] to compare the sensing performance of our RuOx EGFET biosensor.
3. Results and discussion
XRD analysis was employed for the microstructural identification of the sol-gel deposited RuOx on PET, soft-baking at 90 °C for 60 min, in the 2θ range between 35° to 60°, as shown in Fig. 2(a). It was observed that the XRD pattern showed a wide peak at the 2θ range from 53° to 55°, suggesting that the film has a preferred orientation along the RuO2 (211) direction [37]. This pattern indicates the poor crystallinity of RuOx because it does not crystallize at low-temperature annealing, that is, this film may belong to the polycrystalline RuO2, which is consistent with AFM result. To gain further insight into the surface topography of the sol-gel derived RuOx sensing membrane, AFM analysis was performed as shown in Fig. 2(b). It was clearly observed from AFM image that the RuOx film was uniformly distributed on PET substrate, indicating the successful and stable deposition through a chemical route (sol-gel). The surface roughness of the RuOx sensing membrane was evaluated to be 2.86 nm.
Fig. 2
Download: Download high-res image (311KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 2. (a) XRD pattern and (b) AFM surface image of the RuOx sensing membrane.

In order to further address the compositional properties of the RuOx sensing membrane, XPS analysis was performed. The binding energy of Ru 3p core level spin-orbit (3p1/2 and 3p3/2) overlaps was fitted by using a mixed Gaussian-Lorentzian line shape. The 3p3/2 peak located 462.3 eV was represented for RuO2 film [38]. The Ru 3p1/2 and 3p3/2 signals contained two peaks at 484.3 and 461.6 eV, respectively, which we assigned to the RuOx film with less RuO2 content, as shown in Fig. 3(a). From the O 1s XPS spectrum, we obtained a strong fitted peak at 530.5 eV and a weak fitted peak at 529.4 eV, arising from oxygen interaction with the Ru to form RuOx and RuO2 [39], respectively, as demonstrated in Fig. 3(b). From this observation, it is concluded that the RuOx sensing film comprises low RuO2 content.
Fig. 3
Download: Download high-res image (318KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 3. XPS spectra of (a) Ru 3p and (b) O 1s for the RuOx sensing membrane.

As discussed earlier that the fundamental principle of EGFET is identical to an ISFET sensor, for the RuOx on PET based EGFET sensor, the drain current-gate voltage (IDS-VGS) in the linear region can be express as [27]
(1)
where μn is the charge carrier (electron) mobility in the channel, Cox is the oxide capacitance per unit area, VDS is the drain-source voltage, and W and L are the width and length of channel, respectively. When an EGFET sensor was exposed in an electrolyte solution, the threshold voltage (VT) significantly diverges due to the change of surface potential at the interface between the sensing membrane and an electrolyte solution. Hence, VT can be expressed as
(2)
where Eref is the reference electrode potential, ϕo is the surface potential at the interface between an electrolyte and a sensing membrane, χsol is the surface dipole potential of solvent, and φM/q is the work function of the metal [40,41].
The transfer characteristic (IDS-VREF) curves of the RuOx on PET based EGFET were measured at constant VDS = 0.1 V, whereas VREF was swept from 0 to 3.5 V, as depicted in Fig. 4(a). It is found that the reference voltage (VREF) uniformly increased from pH 2 to 12 (from left side to right side) when the hydrogen ion (H+) concentration decreased, whereas the hydroxyl ion (OH−) concentration increased. The high hydroxyl ion concentration increases and the low hydrogen ion concentration decreases to accumulate the negative charge on the sensing surface, which results in the attraction of positively charged holes as well as the repulsion of negatively charged electrons towards the interface, therefore, in order to repel these holes and enhance these electrons from the interface, a large VT need to be applied. Hence, it is concluded that the VT depends on the pH of an electrolyte solution. The pH sensitivity of the RuOx on PET based EGEFT at constant IDS = 100 μA was demonstrated a super-Nernstian pH response of 65.11 mV/pH with a linearity of 99.8% in a wide pH range of 2–12, as shown in Fig. 4(b). The pH sensitivity mechanism of the RuOx film is basically depended on the redox reaction and the general expression of the RuO2 chemical reaction can be represented as [42,43]:
(3)
Fig. 4
Download: Download high-res image (287KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 4. (a) Transfer characteristics (IDS-VREF) of the RuOx on PET based EGFET sensor in different pH buffer solutions (pH = 2–12) (b) Reference voltage as a function of pH for the RuOx on PET based EGFET sensor (in linear region).

The electrode potential is given by
(4)
where Eo is the standard electrode potential, F is the Faradays constant, R is universal gas constant, and [Ru(OH)3], [RuO2], and [H+] represent the activity of RuIII, RuIV, and H+, respectively, at absolute temperature T. Thus, the pH sensitivity can be obtained after the simplified the Eq. (4), which indicates at 25 °C, is
(5)
The above Eq. (5) can be termed as an ideal Nernst equation for oxide electrode given by Eq. (3). The above redox reaction is commonly attributed to near-Nernstian (˜59.1 mV/pH) response for RuO2 sensing membrane, however, our result obtained the super-Nernstian pH value (>59.1 mV/pH) is determined by the ion valance of ruthenium ion, occurring in the redox switching between two oxidation states (Ru3+ to Ru4+). To compare the pH sensitivity more than 59.1 mV/pH, the other materials (e.g. IrOx and CeO2) exhibited the mixed oxidized and reduced forms which give rise to super-Nernstian pH response [44,45]. The expression of these redox forms is shown as below:
(6)
(7)
(8)
 By substituting Eqs. (6) and (7) into (8), the obtained redox reaction would be
(9)
From this redox reaction, it was concluded that two electrons (2e−) are transferred for three protons (3H+). As reported in previous studies that, in the redox metal oxide (like IrOx), transferring from less than 1 electron to one proton could enhance the Nernstian response (>59 mV/pH). Hence, this could be a possible reason for the super-Nernstian pH response of 65.11 mV/pH for our RuOx sensing membrane with less RuO2 content.
Fig. 5(a) depicts a typical output characteristic (IDS-VDS) curves of the RuOx on PET based EGFET sensor in the saturation region, measured in the pH range 2–12. In this measurement procedure, the VGS was kept constant at 2 V when VDS was varied from 0 to 3.5 V. It was observed in the saturation region that the current linearly decreased with increasing the pH of an electrolyte solution. This behaviour can be attributed to the negative bias on the gate because of the reduction of H+ ion concentration. In order to calculate the pH sensitivity, the square root of IDS plotted as a function of pH, as shown in Fig. 5(b). The RuOx on PET based EGFET sensor exhibited a good pH sensitivity of 1.05 (μA)1/2/pH with an excellent linearity of 0.999.
Fig. 5
Download: Download high-res image (301KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 5. (a) Output characteristics (IDS-VDS) of the RuOx on PET based EGFET sensor in the saturation region for different pH buffer solutions (pH = 2–12). (b) The linearity of the IDS for the RuOx EGFET in the saturation region.

For the development of stable and accuracy of pH sensor, the slow response occurred in a pH change at the interface of insulator-electrolyte, which is known as hysteresis (or memory effect), should be diminished. Hysteresis commonly existed in the conductive metal oxide which depends on several factors such as different oxidation states, interior defects, and diffused ions [46]. The existence of interior defects possibly binds with a large number of ions in a buffer solution and induces the slow and delay response to the reference voltage. Fig. 6(a) shows the hysteresis characteristic of the RuOx EGFET sensor measured through a loop of pH 7→4→7→10→7 at 25 °C for a period of 25 min. Hysteresis voltage was calculated by the difference in the VREF between the initial (pH 7) and the terminal (pH 7) voltage in this pH loop. The inset of Fig. 6(a) demonstrates that the hysteresis voltage of the RuOx on PET based EGFET sensor was estimated to be only ∼1 mV. It is apparent from this stability response that the RuOx film after a low thermal oxidation at 90 °C reduces the crystal defects in the film, hence it terminates the binding of ions into its interior defect site. In pursuance of realizing the long-term stability, reliability, and durability of the RuOx sensing membrane, the measurement of drift characteristic is a very significant parameter. It is considered as a non-ideal effect, which depends on the surface oxidation of electrode, hopping and trap limited transport mechanism (known as dispersive transport), to have ultimately an impact on the variation in reference voltage over a period of time in the buffer solution [47]. It is worth mentioning that the drift of this EGFET sensor remained almost unchanged after ˜8 h because the thickness of the hydrated layer may reach to saturate at the electrolyte/RuOx interface [47]. In this investigation, the drift rate of the RuOx sensing membrane was measured in pH 7 buffer solution at 25 °C for 12 h. We calculated the difference in the VREF which is expressed as
(10)
Fig. 6
Download: Download high-res image (518KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 6. (a) Hysteresis characteristics of the RuOx on PET based EGFET sensor in pH loop of 7→4→7→10→7. Inset: enlarged the VREF of the RuOx on PET based EGFET sensor in the VREF-time curve. (b) Drift rate of the RuOx on PET based EGFET sensor measured in solution at pH 7 buffer solutions. (c) Reference voltage of the RuOx on PET based EGFET sensor for different H+, Na+, K+, Mg2+, and Ca2+ ion concentrations. (d) Evaluation of pH sensing performance as a function of bending cycle for the RuOx on PET based EGFET sensor.

The maximum drift rate of the RuOx on PET based EGFET sensor after 12 h was determined to be ∼2.08 mV/h, as shown in Fig. 6(b). This data is evident that the RuOx sensing membrane has a very good stability over a course of time. In order to examine the selectivity of the RuOx on PET based EGFET sensor, various ions, such as Na+, K+, Mg2+, Ca2+, were used. Fig. 6(c) depicts the VREF of the RuOx on PET based EGFET sensor for different H+, Na+, K+, Mg2+, and Ca2+ ion concentrations in pH 7. The response curves were measured in these ion concentrations ranging from 10−6 to 10-2 M. It is found that the RuOx sensing membrane showed a high level of response to H+ ions and had almost the same trend response to other ions. Moreover, in order to realize the mechanical durability of sensing properties under the bending stress, the RuOx film fabricated on flexible PET experienced with repeated bending cycle. Fig. 6(d) shows the pH sensing performance of the RuOx EGFET sensor after a repeated bending cycle. Under the bending cycle up to 500 times, the pH sensitivity and linearity of this EGFET flexible sensor maintained almost unchanged; however, a sudden drop was found after 700 repeated bending cycles, suggesting the presence of microcracks and the deformation microstructure in the sensing film.
A comparative analysis of pH sensing performance, the hysteresis voltage and drift rate of the RuOx EGFETsensor compared with previously reported EGFET sensor reveal that our RuOx sensor exhibited a better pH sensitivity, reversibility and stability, as shown in Table 1.
Table 1. A comparative analysis of fabrication method and sensing performance of our RuOx EGFET sensor with previously reported EGFET pH sensors.

Sensing membrane	Fabrication mode	Sensitivity mV/pH	Hysteresis (mV)	Drift rate (mV/h)
SnO2 [17]	Hydrothermal	55.18	∼3.69	–
WO3 nanosheets [48]	RF-sputtering	63.37	4.79	3.18
TiO2 [28]	Sol-gel	61.44	–	–
ZnO [26]	Sol-gel	38	–	–
MWCNT/In2O3 [49]	Sputtering/drop cast	36.43	–	–
Ru doped TiO2 [41]	RF-sputtering	55.20	–	0.745
Nb2O5 [50]	RF-sputtering	59.2	–	–
RuOx (this work)	Sol-gel	65.11	∼1	2.08
As we discussed earlier that the variation in charge density on the surface of flexible FET alters the surface potential of the sensing membrane, thus leading to the change in the channel current. This fundamental mechanism is behind the binding and the detection of glucose on the transducer surface of a FET based sensor. In this research, we focused on the detection of glucose based on preferential binding between the 4-CPBA and the glucose, as shown in Fig. 7(a). In the process of a binding event, when 4-CPBA interacted with the glucose (1, 2 diol), it basically forms a reversible covalent complex or boronate ester complex [35,51]. The resulting glucose-boronate ester complex exhibited the negative charge (anionic form) which modifies the surface conductivity of the gate electrode. Further insight into the mechanism, this anionic charge at the gate electrode electrostatically interacts with the electron on transducer surface, thereby inducing the shift in the VREF. In order to measure the glucose concentration, 4-CPBA functionalized the RuOx-based EGFET sensor was immersed in the electrolyte solution (10 mM PBS in pH 7.4) connected with a Ag/AgCl reference electrode. Fig. 7(b) depicts that the VREF of the RuOx on PET based EGFET biosensor shifted with increasing the glucose concentration in the IDS-VREF transfer characteristics (at constant IDS of 100 μA) measured at VDS = 0.1 V for VREF from 0 to 3.5 V. Fig. 7(c) shows the dynamic response of the RuOx EGFET biosensor for the glucose sensing, which is much consistent and stable signal. The shift in the VREF plotted as a function of glucose concentration ranging from 1 to 8 mM, as shown in Fig. 7(d). As we can observe from this data that the VREF value shifted towards the positive side with increasing the glucose concentration. This positive shift confirms that the change in carrier concentration of an EGFET channel is induced by a negatively charged boronate ester complex. Meanwhile, it is a very important factor to consider that PBA derivative (in our case 4-CPBA) exhibited a high value of pKa (around 9). The boronate formation basically depends upon the pH of an aqueous solution. The weakly acidic nature of PBA molecule generates a lower fraction of phenyl boronate which can form a boronate-ester complex with the binding of glucose in weakly alkaline solution or physiological pH solution (pH 7.4). Therefore, in our case, the total reference voltage shift is ˜56–58 mV for the glucose concentration range of 1–8 mM. The sensitivity of glucose was calculated to be 6.89 mV/mM with an excellent linearity of 0.993. The serum glucose concentration of 78 ± 6 mg/dl (4.33 ± 0.33 mM) was obtained from a OneTouch® SelectSimple™ blood glucose monitoring system. This concentration level is nearly identical to the serum glucose of 4.28 ± 0.27 mM determined by 4-CPBA functionalized RuOx-based EGFET, suggesting our biosensor is able to accurately quantify the concentration of glucose in serum, as shown in Fig. 7(d). The 4-CPBA functionalized RuOx EGFET biosensor through glucose concentration range from 1 to 8 mM is sufficient for the healthcare examination of blood glucose sample. Since the boronic acid is used as a recognition receptor for 1,2-diol containing compounds, the interference analysis of various biomolecules, e.g. fructose, sucrose, mannose, is an essential parameter for selectivity of biosensor. Fig. 7 (e) demonstrates the VREF shift of the RuOx EGFET biosensor as a function of different saccharide concentrations (fructose, sucrose and mannose), which calculated from transfer characteristic curves. A significant VREF shift (˜56 mV) of our RuOx EGFET biosensor was observed for glucose ranging from 1 to 8 mM. However, comparatively lower VREF shifts were found for fructose, sucrose and mannose, presumably suggesting its low affinity or divergent mode of binding with a boronic acid receptor [52,53].
Fig. 7
Download: Download high-res image (663KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 7. (a) Schematic demonstration of the RuOx on PET based EGFET sensor functionalization method for quantification of glucose. (b) Transfer characteristics (IDS-VREF) of the RuOx on PET based EGFET biosensors for detection of glucose in PBS (10 mM, pH = 7.4). (c) Time dependent response (VREF-T) for stepwise changes in the glucose (1–8 mM). (d) VREF shift of the RuOx-based EGFET biosensor as a function of glucose concentration (1–8 mM). The red circle represents the concentration of serum uric acid determined by the RuOx-based EGFET biosensor. (e) VREF shift of the RuOx-based EGFET biosensor plotted as functions of various saccharide concentrations in PBS (10 mM, pH = 7.4) (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article).

The previous results are reported in Table 2. The glucose sensitivity of our RuOx EGFET biosensor was estimated to be 6.89 mV/mM, which exceeded that of other EGFET glucose biosensors using Ru doped TiO2 [54], multi-walled carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs) [55], Nb2O5 [56], SnO2/ITO [57], and ZnO nanoarray [58] sensing membranes.
Table 2. Analytical characteristics of previously reported EGFET-based glucose sensors compared to our RuOx EGFET glucose one.

Sensing membrane	Fabrication mode	Sensitivity	Range (mM)	Linearity
Ru doped TiO2 [54]	RF-Sputtering	0.320 mV/(mg/dL)	5.5–27.7	0.995
MWCNTs [55]	CVD	0.302 mV/(mg/dL)	3.3–20	0.995
Nb2O5 [56]	LPCVD	5.62 mV/mM	2–7	0.880
SnO2/ITO [57]	RF-Sputtering	0.256 mV/(mg/dL)	2.5–20	0.95
ZnO nanoarray [58]	Sol-gel	0.395 mV/μM	0.02–0.1	0.967
RuOx (Present work)	Sol-gel	6.89 mV/mM	1–8	0.993
4. Conclusion
In this article, our attention was focused on the fabrication of sol-gel derived RuOx film on flexible PET substrate for pH sensor and applied this platform for the detection of glucose by functionalization of a synthetic receptor (4-CPBA). The structural and compositional properties of the RuOx prepared by a low-temperature thermal oxidation (90 °C) were also been studied. The RuOx on PET based EGFET sensor exhibited super-Nernstian pH performance including a high pH sensitivity of 65.11 mV/pH, a low hysteresis voltage of ∼1 mV and a small drift rate of ∼2.08 mV/h. The existence of mixed oxidized and reduced forms of less RuO2 content in the RuOx film is possibly contributed to its super-Nernstian performance. The RuOx-based EGFET sensor also showed a high selective response to H+. Furthermore, this RuOx EGFET flexible sensor exhibited a good mechanical bendability after 500 repeated bending cycles. However, a low-temperature thermal oxidation diminishes the crystal defects and imperfections. In order to develop the detection method for enzyme-free glucose, 4-CPBA functionalized on the transducer surface facilitates the formation of negatively charged boronate-ester complexes after binding with glucose. A RuOx on PET based EGFET biosensor is able to detect the glucose with the sensitivity and linearity of 6.89 mV/mM and 0.993, respectively, in the glucose concentration range of 1–8 mM. Finally, we successfully demonstrate the use of 4-CPBA functionalized RuOx-based EGFET for the detection of glucose. More importantly, the concentration of serum glucose measured by our RuOx-based EGFET biosensor is almost identical to that determined by commercial blood glucose monitoring system. Moreover, the glucose detection of this EGFET biosensor showed a higher VREF shift compared to other saccharides. The threshold concentration level of blood glucose ranges between 5–7 mM, hence our RuOx EGFET biosensor performance is sufficient to apply a clinical diagnosis of blood glucose level in healthcare diagnostics.
