Field-effect-transistor-based calcium ion sensors using Zn3Ta2O5 sensing membrane
Author links open overlay panel
Ching-Ting Lee
, 
Ying-Shuo Chiu

Show more

Add to Mendeley

Share

Cite
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.snb.2014.07.055
Get rights and content
Abstract
To overcome the surface damage of ZnO-based biosensors operated in strong acidic environments, similar to the stomach environment, the Zn3Ta2O5 stoichiometric thin films were applied in the field-effect-transistor (FET)-based calcium ion biosensors as the sensing membrane. Since the Zn3Ta2O5 sensing membrane possessed the property of high corrosion resistance and high enzyme immobilization, the resulting calcium ion biosensors can be stably operated in the strong acid environments. The sensing sensitivity of the Zn3Ta2O5 FET-based biosensor was 17.1 μA/pCa within calcium ion concentration range from pCa = 1 to pCa = 6 under the solution of pH = 2 compared to the 12.8 μA/pCa within the pCa range from 1 to 5 of the FET-based biosensor using the Ta2O5 sensing membrane. The superior results were attributed to the better immobilization between the calmodulin (CaM) and the Zn3Ta2O5 sensing membrane. Consequently, the Michaelis–Menten constant of 1.08 mM for the Zn3Ta2O5 sensing membrane was much better than 1.45 mM of the Ta2O5 sensing membrane.
Previous article in issue
Next article in issue
Keywords
Calcium ion biosensorsMichaelis–Menten constantVapor cooling condensation methodZn3Ta2O5 sensing membrane
1. Introduction
Calcium ion is an essential element in the cells to maintain the operation of human body, such as message transfer, enzyme activity regulation, muscle contraction, metabolism control, electrolyte equilibrium, and skeleton growth [1], [2]. If calcium ion concentration shortage is induced, the balance of blood and physical functions would be broken. In general, it is the most common way to supply calcium ions for human by taking the calcium tablet. In order to let small intestines to absorb calcium ions, the calcium tablet made from calcium carbonate (CaCO3) is required to be dissolved in the stomach. The reaction of calcium ions dissolved from calcium tablet in the stomach can be described as follows:
(1)
(2)
Because the normal pH value in the stomach is below 3, how to precisely detect the concentration of calcium ions and maintain the operation of sensors under the strong acid environment becomes a significant issue. The zinc oxide (ZnO)-based materials have been extensively applied in the numerous biosensors due to their favorable properties including biocompatibility, stability, and nontoxicity. Furthermore, the ZnO-based materials can provide a friendly environment with isoelectric point (IEP) of 9.5 for immobilizing enzyme and retaining their activity. Based on the successful deposition of ZnO-based thin films with high performances and insulator properties using the vapor cooling condensation methods and other methods [3], [4], [5], [6], the ZnO-based materials were widely applied as the sensing membranes in various biosensors based on the above merits [7], [8], [9], [10], [11]. Among the biosensors, the field-effect-transistor-based sensors with extended-gate electrode sensing head, which possesses the advantages of easier fabrication and disposability, is suitable to combine with the ZnO sensing membrane as the biosensors for fast and disposable detection. However, the ZnO-based sensors are restricted to be applied in the strong acidic environments due to the surface damage issue of the ZnO sensing membrane [12]. To overcome this obstacle, Ta2O5 sensing membrane used in sensors and operated in strong acidic environment was reported, previously [13]. However, its immobilization ability of enzyme was suffered from its low isoelectric point of about 3 [14]. In this work, to obtain sensing membrane with high acid resistance and high immobilization ability, the Zn3Ta2O5 stoichiometric thin film deposited using the vapor cooling condensation system was employed in the FET-based calcium ion biosensors as the sensing membrane of the extended sensing head. By taking the advantage of the better corrosion resistance and biocompatibility of the Zn3Ta2O5 sensing membrane, the FET-based calcium ion biosensors were operated in the acid solution to simulate the similar environment of the stomach. The sensing characteristics of the resulting Zn3Ta2O5 FET-based biosensors were measured and analyzed compared to the FET-based biosensors using Ta2O5 sensing membrane.
2. Experiments
To fabricate the calcium ion biosensors using Zn3Ta2O5 sensing membrane on the extended sensing head, an electron-beam evaporation system was first used to deposit a 100-nm-thick Al conducting layer on the silicon (Si) substrates. The samples were then attached on a liquid nitrogen-cooled stainless steel plate in the vapor cooling condensation system for depositing Zn3Ta2O5 sensing membrane. The merits and relating characteristics of the ZnO-based thin films deposited using the vapor cooling condensation system were described and discussed previously [3], [4]. The ZnO powder and the Ta2O5 powder were loaded separately in the different tungsten boats as the vapor source of the Zn3Ta2O5 films in the vapor cooling condensation system. The sublimated vapors were then deposited and formed a 200-nm-thick Zn3Ta2O5 thin film on the Al-coated Si substrates via heating process. In addition, the deposition conditions such as the heating power were monitored and controlled during the film deposition. It was found that the films deposited under the same condition could reveal the similar properties. For comparison, the Ta2O5 sensing membrane was also deposited on the same Al-coated Si substrates under the similar deposition conditions. To package the FET-based sensors, the extended sensing head of the sensor was encapsulated by an epoxy resin and left the exposed active sensing region. For the immobilization process of the calcium ion biosensors, the 3-glycidyloxypropyltrimethoxysilane (GPTS) and the toluene mixture was spun on the sensing membrane. After baking at 120 °C for 2 h, the biosensor was immersed in a phosphate buffer solution (PBS) to wash away the unbounded GPTS. The calmodulin (CaM), a calcium-binding multifunctional regulatory protein, was diluted by the phosphate buffer solution with a concentration of 5 mg/mL. Finally, the diluted calmodulin was titrated on the sensing membrane and kept at 35 °C for 5 h for immobilization. Moreover, the Al conductive layer of the extended sensing head was connected to the gate of the commercial MOSFET device (CD4007UB). The source and drain electrodes of the CD4007UB MOSFET device were connected to an Agilent 4156 C semiconductor parameter analyzer. Both the sensing head of the sensor and the Ag/AgCl reference electrode were dipped into the solution for measurement. The whole schematic configuration of the sensor and measurement system is shown in Fig. 1(a). The Ag/AgCl reference electrode, the source electrode of the CD4007UB MOSFET, and the drain electrode of the CD4007UB MOSFET were connected to the Agilent 4156C semiconductor parameter analyzer, respectively. Fig. 1(b) shows the circuit diagram of measurement system where the reference voltage (VREF) and the drain–source voltage (VDS) were provided by the Agilent 4156C semiconductor parameter analyzer. Meanwhile, the drain–source current (IDS) of the CD4007UB MOSFET was measured by the Agilent 4156C semiconductor parameter analyzer. When the detected ions were accumulated on the sensing surface, it was equivalent to apply an extra voltage at the extended sensing gate. Therefore, the gate voltage of CD4007UB MOSFET was the extra voltage together with the reference voltage. The IDS could be modulated by varying the calcium ion concentration of the measuring solution.

Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 1. (a) The schematic configuration and (b) the circuit diagram of measurement system for the FET-based biosensors.

3. Experimental results and discussion
The element composition of the deposited thin films was measured using an energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy. In the deposited films, the atomic percentage of the element O, Zn, and Ta was 50.13%, 32.01%, and 17.86%, respectively. It was found that the deposited films could be indicated as Zn3Ta2O5 films. In addition, Fig. 2 shows the optical energy bandgap (Eg) estimated by the dependence on the square of absorption coefficient (α2) on the photon energy (hν) of the ZnO, Zn3Ta2O5, and Ta2O5 thin films [15]. The associated optical energy bandgap of the ZnO film, Zn3Ta2O5 film, and Ta2O5 film deduced by fitting the curves was 3.28 eV, 3.40 eV, and 4.61 eV, respectively. Because the FET-based calcium ion biosensors were designed to be operated in the strong acid solution similar to the environment of the stomach, the pH response performances, especially under the pH value of 3, of the Zn3Ta2O5 FET-based biosensors were measured using an Agilent 4156C semiconductor parameter analyzer. The Zn3Ta2O5 FET-based sensor, carried out at a reference voltage of 4 V, was operated in the solution with the pH value of 1.5, 2, 2.5, 3, 3.5, 4, 6, 8, and 10, respectively. Fig. 3(a) and (b) shows the resulting drain–source current versus drain–source voltage (IDS–VDS) with reference voltage is fixed at 4 V and drain–source current versus reference voltage (IDS–VREF) characteristics with drain–source voltage is fixed at 0.3 V of the Zn3Ta2O5 FET-based sensors, respectively. The measured results exhibited that drain–source current revealed a favorable variation in accordance with the pH value even in a strong acid solution of the pH value less than 3. Generally, the phenomena of the drain–source current varied with the pH value of the solution could be explained by the site-binding model [16], [17], [18]. In the site-binding model, the surface potential voltage of the sensing membrane is the function of the pH value. Consequently, by applying a fixed reference voltage to the Ag/AgCl reference electrode in the measuring system of this research, the surface potential change caused by the different solution could reflect to the change of the gate voltage of the MOSFET (CD4007UB) and led the corresponding change of the drain–source current. In addition, the AFM image of the Zn3Ta2O5 sensing membrane after measuring under the solution of pH = 2 is shown in the inset of Fig. 3(b). The corresponding root-mean-square (rms) value of the surface roughness of the Zn3Ta2O5 film was 15.45 nm. This phenomenon indicated that the surface morphology was stable. Because the Ag/AgCl reference electrode was only used to provide a fixed voltage to the FET-based sensors from Agilent 4156 system, the Ca2+ sensing behaviors on the membrane were almost not affected by the Cl− ions. Considering that the Cl− ions may affect the fixed voltage the Ag/AgCl reference provided, the IDS–VREF of Zn3Ta2O5 FET-based sensors in the different Cl− concentration from 10−5 M to 10−1 M shown in Fig. 4 was measured to understand whether the voltage shift was induced by the Cl− ions. To avoid the Ca2+ ions be detected from the sensors, the NaCl was used to provide different Cl− concentration in the solution. The IDS–VREF characteristic shown in Fig. 4 exhibited that the drain–source current difference was very little in the Cl− concentration of 10−1–10−5 M. The voltage shift in various Cl− concentrations shown in the inset of Fig. 4 showed that the voltage shift of the FET-based sensors in Cl− concentration 10−1 M was less than 0.0005 V. Based on the results, the influence caused by the Cl− ions is not obvious in this research. To investigate the calcium ion sensing performances and the detection limit of the Zn3Ta2O5 FET-based sensors, the biosensors were measured in the calcium chloride solution with the concentration range from 10−7 M to 10−1 M. During the measurement, the pH value of the measuring solution was kept at 2 to simulate the stomach environment of human. At the same time, the FET-based sensors using the Ta2O5 sensing membrane were also measured under the same condition for comparison. Fig. 5 shows the sensing response of the FET-based sensor using the Zn3Ta2O5 sensing membrane and the Ta2O5 sensing membrane operated at a drain–source voltage of 5 V and a reference voltage of 4 V, respectively. The inset of Fig. 5 shows the IDS-VDS characteristic of Zn3Ta2O5 FET sensor with PBS only. Because different calcium ion concentration would lead the surface voltage change on the sensing membrane, the drain–source current would be changed in various calcium ion concentrations. The experimental results verified that the Zn3Ta2O5 FET-based biosensors possessed an obviously larger current response compared with that of the Ta2O5 FET-based biosensors. Furthermore, the lowest detection limit of the Zn3Ta2O5 FET-based biosensors was in the calcium ion concentration of 10−6 M which was one order better than the detection limit of 10−5 M of the Ta2O5 FET-based biosensors. The calculated sensing sensitivity shown in Fig. 6 could be derived from the drain–source current change at each step of the calcium ion concentration shown in Fig. 5. The sensing sensitivity is defined as the drain–source current change per negative logarithm of calcium ion concentration (pCa). The sensing sensitivity of the Zn3Ta2O5 FET-based biosensors was 17.1 μA/pCa within the range from pCa = 1 (calcium ion concentration = 0.1 M) to pCa = 6 (calcium ion concentration = 10−6 M) compared to 12.8 μA/pCa of the Ta2O5 FET-based biosensors within the range from pCa = 1 to pCa = 5. Fig. 7 shows the sensing sensitivity of the Zn3Ta2O5 and Ta2O5 FET-based biosensors measured in the various values of solution, respectively. The experimental results revealed that the sensing sensitivity of the Zn3Ta2O5 FET-based biosensors was quite stable within the pH range from 1.5 to 8 and also better than that of the Ta2O5 FET-based biosensors. The superior sensing performance of the Zn3Ta2O5 FET-based biosensors was attributed to the favorable CaM immobilization environment provided by the Zn3Ta2O5 sensing membrane. To further verify the immobilization properties of the Zn3Ta2O5 and Ta2O5 sensing membranes, the apparent Michaelis–Menten constant (
) was introduced to calculate the reflection of the enzymatic affinity using the Lineweaver–Burk equation [19], [20]:
(3)
where Iss is the steady-state current, Imax is the maximum current at the saturated concentration, and C is the concentration of calcium ion. Fig. 8 shows the relation between the reciprocal of drain–source current change and the reciprocal of calcium ion concentration for calculating the apparent Michaelis–Menten constant. To include the normal calcium ion concentration range in the human serum, the measuring range of the calcium ion concentration was from 0.5 mM to 10 mM. The calculated 
 of the Zn3Ta2O5 sensing membrane was 1.08 mM compared to 1.45 mM of the Ta2O5 sensing membrane. The low value of 
 revealed that the CaM immobilized on sensing membrane could retain its effective bioactivity and possess the high affinity between the CaM and the calcium ions. Consequently, the favorable sensing performance of the Zn3Ta2O5 FET-based biosensors could be verified by the calculated results.

Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 2. The dependence of the square of absorption coefficient (α2) on the photon energy (hν) for ZnO, Zn3Ta2O5 and Ta2O5 films.


Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 3. (a) The drain–source current–drain–source voltage characteristics and (b) the drain–source current–reference voltage characteristics of Zn3Ta2O5 FET-based biosensors. The inset of Fig. 3(b) shows the AFM image of the Zn3Ta2O5 sensing membrane after measuring under the solution of pH = 2.


Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 4. The IDS–VREF characteristics of Zn3Ta2O5 FET-based sensors in the different Cl− concentration. The inset shows the voltage shift in various Cl− concentrations. The inset shows the IDS–VDS characteristics of Zn3Ta2O5 FET sensors with PBS only.


Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 5. The calcium ion sensing response of the FET-based sensors with Zn3Ta2O5 and Ta2O5 sensing membranes.


Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 6. The drain–source current change of the FET-based sensors with Zn3Ta2O5 and Ta2O5 sensing membranes as a function of calcium ion concentration in logarithm scale.


Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 7. Comparison of the calcium sensing sensitivity for Zn3Ta2O5 and Ta2O5 FET-based biosensors measured in the various pH values.


Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 8. The relation between both the reciprocal of drain–source current change (ΔIDS) and the calcium concentration for calculating the apparent Michaelis–Menten constant.

4. Conclusions
In this work, the Zn3Ta2O5 sensing membrane was successfully employed in the FET-based calcium ion biosensors and exhibited favorable sensing performances. The sensing sensitivity of Zn3Ta2O5 FET-based biosensor was 17.1 μA/pCa within the pCa = 1 to pCa = 6 compared with 12.8 μA/pCa of the Ta2O5 FET-based biosensor within the range from pCa = 1 to pCa = 5. The Zn3Ta2O5 FET-based biosensors could retain high sensitivity and stably operated in the strong acid solution under pH value of 2. Furthermore, the 
 of the Zn3Ta2O5 sensing membranes was 1.08 mM which was much better than 1.45 mM of the Ta2O5 sensing membranes. In view of the high acid resistance, high immobilization ability, and high sensing sensitivity, the Zn3Ta2O5 thin films can be expected to be widely used in the biomedical and strong acid chemical applications.
