Structural properties and sensing performance of CeTiO3 ceramic films as a solid-state pH sensor
Author links open overlay panelTung-Ming Pan a b
, 
Tung-Yu Wu a
, 
Chi-Lin Chan a
, 
See-Tong Pang b

Show more

Add to Mendeley

Share

Cite
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ceramint.2018.04.047
Get rights and content
Abstract
In this paper, we have studied the impact of postannealing treatment on the structural properties and sensing characteristics of CeTiO3 ceramic membranes deposited on Si substrate by sputtering for solid-state electrolyte-insulator-semiconductor (EIS) pH sensors. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy, Auger electron spectroscopy, X-ray diffraction, and atomic force microscopy were used to study the chemical compositions, elemental depth profiles, film structures, and surface morphologies of CeTiO3 ceramic membranes treated at three rapid thermal annealing (RTA) temperatures of 700, 800 and 900 °C. The sensing performance of the CeTiO3 ceramic membranes annealed at three different RTA temperatures is strongly correlated to their structural properties. The CeTiO3 EIS device after RTA at 800 °C exhibited the best sensing characteristics (pH sensitivity, hysteresis voltage and drift rate) among these RTA temperatures. We attribute this behavior to the optimal RTA temperature enhancing the Ce3+/Ce4+ ratio of CeTiO3 ceramic membrane, reducing an interfacial layer at the CeTiO3-Si interface, and increasing its surface roughness.
Previous article in issue
Next article in issue
Keywords
CeTiO3 ceramic filmElectrolyte–insulator–semiconductor (EIS)pH sensor
1. Introduction
Evaluation of pH value is one of the most indicative measurements in chemical processing related to the fields of chemistry, agriculture, biochemistry, and medicine. Due to insensitive to interfering species and Nernstian response, the most commonly employed electrode for measuring pH persists conventional pH glass electrodes. Nevertheless, glass electrodes have some problems associated with the fouling the membrane surface in aggressive electrolyte species, easy cracking and fragility of the glass membrane, and hard miniaturization for a micro system application [1]. The development of alternative pH sensors such as ceramic electrodes has been completely overcome in these weaknesses [2].
Silicon-based sensor is one type of semiconductor-based solid-state sensors [3]. Recently, there has been growing interest in the use of field-effect transistor (FET) structures and related devices as transducers [4]. In a traditional metal-oxide-semiconductor field-effect transistor (MOSFET) device, a sufficient potential across the gate electrode and the Si substrate leads to a variation in the vertical electric field at the oxide-Si interface, and thus causing modulation of the channel conductance. Bergveld first proposed an ion-sensitive field-effect transistor (ISFET) sensor to monitor various ionic species and compounds for biomedical, environmental, and clinical applications because of its high reliability, rapid response, and low output impedance [5]. This sensor is the counterpart of a MOSFET device. The main difference is the metal gate omitted and the gate oxide directly exposed to an aqueous solution. The structure of an electrolyte-insulator-semiconductor (EIS) device is a pivotal component of an ISFET sensor. In comparison with an ISFET device, an EIS device possesses a simpler structure, easier and cheaper manufacturing process. When a bias is applied to a reference electrode, an EIS device strictly monitors the capacitance change, whereas an ISFET device directly detects the current change. The gate oxide film is a very important material in an EIS or ISFET device because it is directly immersed an aqueous solution. The large strength and high dielectric constant are essential for such an oxide film. Furthermore, the surface properties of gate oxide film of an EIS or ISFET sensor can affect its sensing performance due to the change in the surface site density [6], [7].
In recent years, high permittivity (high-κ) inorganic gate dielectrics, such as tantalum oxide (Ta2O5), titanium oxide (TiO2), zirconium oxide (ZrO2), hafnium oxide (HfO2), yttrium oxide (Y2O3), have received much attention as a key sensing membrane in the pH-sensitive EIS or ISFET due to their high sensitivity, high selectivity and good long-term stability [7], [8], [9], [10]. However, there are two issues in high-κ dielectric materials. One issue is that the formation of a silicide or silicate layer at the oxide-Si interface frequently occurs when these dielectric materials are directly deposited on Si or during subsequent high-temperature annealing. This is because they are not thermally stable on Si substrate. The other issue is that the formation of the rough surface as well as grain boundary after the high-temperature annealing affects the leakage current and reliability of the gate dielectric as a result of the phase structure transformed from amorphous to crystalline [11], [12]. High-κ rare-earth oxide films, including lanthanum oxide (La2O3), cerium oxide (CeO2), praseodymium oxide (Pr2O3), gadolinium oxide (Gd2O3), erbium oxide (Er2O3) [13], [14], [15], are widely studied to replace a conventional silicon oxide (SiO2) as a gate dielectric to inhibit the unacceptable gate leakage current. Among these oxide films, CeO2 materials are considered to be an attractive choice for a gate dielectric because of their high κ values, wide band gaps, large energy band offsets to silicon, and good thermal stability. However, rare-earth oxide films are very hygroscopic and unstable in air to form hydroxide. Therefore, the moisture absorption in rare-earth oxide films will degrade their film properties to influence the related electrical performance [16], [17]. In order to avoid the moisture absorption, several groups have studied various methods such as Y2O3 incorporating, TiOx doping, or Ti adding into rare-earth oxide films [17], [18], [19].
In this work, we have explored the effect of postannealing treatment on the structural properties and sensing characteristics of CeTiO3 ceramic membranes deposited on Si substrate by sputtering for solid-state EIS pH sensors. Postannealing process will most likely affect sensing characteristics of CeTiO3 ceramic membrane, the correlation between structural property and sensor performance needs further investigation. The CeTiO3 EIS sensor annealed at 800 °C showed a higher pH sensitivity of 73.6 mV/pH in the buffer solutions ranging from pH 2 to pH 12, a lower hysteresis voltage of 1 mV in a loop of pH 7→pH 4→pH 7→pH 10→pH 7, and a smaller drift rate of 0.35 mV/h in the pH 7, in comparison with other annealing temperatures.
2. Experimental section
P-type (100) Czochralski Si wafers with a resistivity of 5–10 Ω cm were employed as the starting materials in this work. Prior to the deposition of CeTixOy ceramic film, the Si wafers were cleaned by a standard RCA process and then dipped into an HF solution to expel the chemical oxide. Thin CeTiO3 ceramic films (~ 40 nm) were deposited on the HF-last Si wafers by radio-frequency sputtering of CeTiO3 target in Ar ambient at room temperature. Next, the deposited thin ceramic films were annealed using the rapid thermal annealing (RTA) process at three different temperatures (700, 800 and 900 °C) in O2 ambient for 30 s to improve the quality of ceramic film. The thickness of thin CeTiO3 ceramic films was estimated from spectroscopic ellipsometry. Afterward, a 400-nm-thick Al film was deposited on the rear side of Si wafers using a thermal coater. The sensing area of the deposited CeTiO3 ceramic film was defined through a robotic dispensing system using an adhesive silicone gel (S181) behaved as a segregating layer. Subsequently, EIS sensors with CeTiO3 ceramic films were assembled on the copper lines of a printed circuit board by using a silver gel serving as a structure of conductive lines. Finally, CeTiO3 EIS sensors were carried out by an epoxy resin encapsulated between the Cu line and EIS device to suppress the electrolyte leakage. The detailed EIS structure was illustrated in Fig. 1.
Fig. 1
Download: Download high-res image (138KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 1. Schematic representation of the structure of a CeTiO3 EIS sensor.

The structural properties of the CeTiO3 ceramic films were characterized by X-ray diffraction (XRD) using Cu Kα radiation (Bruker D8 Discover X-ray diffractometer). The chemical bonding on the CeTiO3 ceramic surfaces was confirmed using X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) with a monochromatic Al Kα source (Thermo VG Scientific Microlab 350 system). The calibration of binding energy scale for each element (Ce 3d, Ti 2p and O 1s) was performed with the C 1s line (285 eV). The element distribution of the CeTiO3 ceramic films along the depth direction was investigated by a PHI-700 (ULVAC-PHI) Auger electron spectroscopy (AES). The surface morphologies of the ceramic films after RTA at three temperatures were observed using atomic force microscopy (AFM; NT-MDT Solver P47) operated in tapping mode having a scan area of 3 × 3 µm2.
The capacitance–voltage (C–V) curves against pH buffer solutions (Merck) were measured by a Hewlett–Packard (HP) 4284A LCR meter at an ac signal frequency of 500 Hz using a Ag/AgCl reference electrode to evaluate the sensing performance of the CeTiO3 EIS sensors annealed at different RTA temperatures. Each experiment was performed at room temperature in the dark to elude interference from light and noise.
3. Results and discussion
XRD, XPS, AES, and AFM analyses were employed to investigate the impact of RTA temperature on the CeTiO3 ceramic membrane properties. To realize the crystalline phase and orientation of the CeTiO3 ceramic films, XRD was used to check the crystalline structures of CeTiO3 ceramic films annealed at three various RTA temperatures. The cerium titanate (CeTixOy) mainly depends on two Ce3+ and Ce4+ oxidation states to form different phases; some phases, such as CeTiO3, Ce2TiO5 and Ce2Ti2O7, consist of the Ce3+ state, while the other phases, e. g. CeTiO4 and CeTi2O6, are composed of the Ce4+ state. The occurrence possibility of these phases is related to the annealing atmosphere. As a rule, performing a decreasing atmosphere or a low vacuum achieves the cerium titanate phases with Ce3+ state, whereas annealing in air obtains these phases with Ce4+ state [20]. Fig. 2 shows the XRD patterns of the CeTiO3 ceramic films after RTA at three temperatures. Both 700 and 800 °C, there were only weak CeO2 (111) diffraction peaks, suggesting an amorphous structure. The rise in RTA temperature up to 900 °C, the film was mainly grown in the CeO2 (111) orientation and had relatively two weak CeO2 (220) and (311) peaks. The polycrystalline film could thus be achieved after RTA at 900 °C. For CeO2 (111) diffraction peak, the relative intensity was increased substantially as the RTA temperature was increased, indicating the good crystallinity in the 900 °C-annealed film.
Fig. 2
Download: Download high-res image (213KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 2. XRD patterns of CeTiO3 ceramic films annealed at three RTA temperatures.

Fig. 3(a)–(c) show the Ce 3d, Ti 2p and O 1s XPS spectra of the CeTiO3 ceramic films treated with the 700, 800 and 900 °C, respectively. The Ce 3d peak was fitted using a linear background with an optimal mixed Lorentzian–Gaussian bands, but the fitted Ti 2p and O 1s peaks were obtained by a Shirley background. Fig. 3(a) depicts Ce 3d3/2 and 3d5/2 spectra of the CeTiO3 ceramic films annealed at three different RTA temperatures. The XPS Ce 3d3/2 and 3d5/2 spin orbit doublets indicate u′′′, u′′, u′, u and v′′′, v′′, v′, v, respectively. The labeled u′ at 902.9 eV and v′ at 884.7 eV sub-bands denote the 3d104f1 initial electronic state related to Ce3+, while the u′′′ at 916.5 eV, u′′ at 907.1 eV, u at 900.5 eV, v′′′ at 898 eV, v′′ at 888.7 eV, and v at 882.2 eV sub-bands represent the 3d104f0 state corresponding to Ce4+. Each spin orbit doublet of these ceramic films is separated by about 18.3 eV, which is in good agreement with previously reported data [21]. Based on the criterion, the area of v and u peaks was fitted by the fact that the intensity ratio of the v peak to its relative u peak is equal to ~ 2. The fitted peak areas of Ce3+ and Ce4+ components are frequently used to evaluate their corresponding concentrations in the ceramic films. The Ce3+ ratio, estimated by Ce3+/(Ce3+ + Ce4+), of CeTiO3 ceramic films annealed at 700, 800 and 900 °C is 19.23%, 20.00% and 19.95%, respectively. It is worth noting that the Ce3+ ratio gradually increased with increasing the RTA temperature but the RTA at 900 °C was unchanged, indicating the blend transition of ceramic film. In brief, as demonstrated in Fig. 3(a), the intensity of the Ce3+ peak features associated with u′ and v′ increased with rising the RTA temperature, while the Ce4+ peak features with respect to u′′′, u′′, u, v′′′, v′′, and v decreased, accordingly, but had no change after RTA at 900 °C. This result may be accounted for by a partial increase in oxidation state transforming from Ce4+ to Ce3+ during firing in the oxygen ambient. On the other hand, CeO2 film exhibited poor thermal stability after annealing at high temperatures, thus forming a silicate layer at the oxide-Si substrate interface [22].
Fig. 3
Download: Download high-res image (1002KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 3. XPS spectra displaying the (a) Ce 3d, (b) Ti 2p, and (c) O 1s energy levels in CeTiO3 ceramic films annealed at three RTA temperatures.

Fig. 3(b) shows the Ti 2p XPS spectra of the CeTiO3 ceramic films after RTA at various temperatures. The spectrum can be decomposed by fitting a Gaussian–Lorentzian mixture function to resolve two 2p1/2 and 2p3/2 element bands, which is spin-orbit splitting. The Ti 2p1/2 and 2p3/2 core level peaks for pure TiO2 are located at the binding energies of 464.4 and 458.8 eV, respectively, indicating that all cations belong to the Ti4+ state [23]. For the film annealed at both 800 and 900 °C, the Ti spin-orbit bands (2p1/2 and 2p3/2) in each peak of the CeTiO3 spectra were well fitted into two curves (at 464.4 and 458.7 eV, respectively), representing the state of Ti4+ ion. Otherwise, after RTA at 700 °C, the first band feature has a 2p1/2 binding energy of 464 eV, whereas the second band feature has a 2p3/2 binding energy of 458.3 eV. The spin-orbit split doublet peaks corresponding to this second Ti2+ ion state were shifted to lower energies of ~ 0.5 eV [24]. The TiO component in the CeTiO3 film was better fitted due to the existence of Ti2+ state. This may be ascribed to an increase in the interatomic potentials because of a change in the coordination number from Ti3+ to Ti2+ and shortening of the Ti–O bond [25].
Fig. 3(c) shows the O 1s XPS spectra of the CeTiO3 ceramic films prepared at the three different RTA temperatures. The O 1s peak at the binding energy of 530 eV can be assigned to the Ce2O3, whereas the peak at the binding energy of 528.8 eV can be attributed to the CeO2 [26]. The O 1s broad spectra of CeTiO3 ceramic films was well deconvoluted into four main components associated with binding energies at 528.9, 529.4, 530.2, and 531.4 eV, respectively. The four components can be assigned to Ce–O (Ce4+) bond, Ce–O–Ti bond, Ce–O bond (Ce3+), and surface hydroxyls (Ce–OH), respectively. The first component with the binding energy of O 1s spectrum at 528.9 eV is attributed to the oxygen attached to Ce4+. The second component located at 529.4 eV can be unambiguously assigned to the oxygen bound to Ce and Ti. The third component with the binding energy of 530.2 eV is attributed to the oxygen attached to Ce3+. The fourth component feature located at 531.4 eV may be attributed to the adsorbed surface oxygen species [23], e.g., hydroxyls (–OH), carbonates (–CO3). It is found that the oxygen bound to Ce3+ exhibits a higher binding energy of 1.3 eV than that of Ce4+, which is consistent with previous report [26]. The intensity of the O 1s peak corresponding to CeTiO3 gradually decreased with rising the RTA temperature. Moreover, the ceramic film annealed at both 800 and 900 °C shows a higher and lower peak intensities related to Ce2O3 and CeO2 components, respectively, compared with the RTA at 700 °C. With the increasing the RTA temperature, our results give the chemical evolution of Ce ion state in CeTiO3 ceramic film because the Ce3+ and Ce4+ states coexists in CeTiO3 ceramic film with a high Ce3+ content.
The AES depth profiles of the CeTiO3 ceramic film after RTA at the 700, 800 and 900 °C were presented in Fig. 4(a)–(c), respectively. They demonstrate the distribution of Ce, Ti, O, and Si across the CeTiO3/Si region as a function of depth for these ceramic films. The Ce, Ti and O content of the CeTiO3 ceramic films remained rather constant under all RTA temperatures, which is the Ce:Ti:O ratio of about 1:1:3, indicating that the stoichiometry of these ceramic films can be represented as a CeTiO3 structure. The depth profile of the CeTiO3 films annealed at both 700 and 800 °C comprises a flat region with a blurring sharp edge, which represents the distribution of Ce, Ti and O atoms in the film with a thinner silicate layer. An interfacial layer may be attributed to a rapid diffusion of oxygen through the ceramic film during the sputtering deposition and/or subsequent postannealing treatment [27]. As a result, the oxygen diffusing through this ceramic film reacts with Si substrate at the boundary region to produce an unintended and uncontrolled interfacial layer. It should be noted that the Ti content of the film gradually increases near the boundary region of Si substrate with increasing the RTA temperature. Fig. 4(c) depicts that a thicker interfacial layer with high Ti and Si components partially grows at the boundary region of Si substrate after annealing at 900 °C. The impact of this interfacial layer on the sensing performance of the EIS sensor is demonstrated below.
Fig. 4
Download: Download high-res image (648KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 4. AES depth profiles of CeTiO3 ceramic films annealed at (a) 700 °C, (b) 800 °C and (c) 900 °C.

The surface morphology and grain size of the CeTiO3 ceramic membranes prepared at three different RTA temperatures were studied by AFM images. The surface morphology changes of CeTiO3 ceramic membranes after RTA treatment are shown in Fig. 5(a)–(c). The grain size as well as surface morphology in these ceramic membranes can be easily varied by rising the RTA temperature, where the granular character of the membranes is achieved by sputtering method. The CeTiO3 ceramic membranes after annealing at both 800 and 900 °C show relatively spherical grains with nanometric dimensions, no cracks and a dense structure. Moreover, it is evident the number of grains gradually increases with increasing the RTA temperature. The surface roughness of the CeTiO3 membranes annealed at the 700, 800 and 900 °C is founded to be 0.54, 0.69 and 1.12 nm, respectively. The roughness of the CeTiO3 membrane obviously increases with rising at RTA temperature due to an increase in the number of grains and grain size. Apart from the achievement of the sensing membrane quality, feasibility of controlling grains grown after postannealing process has become an important in these ceramic membranes, because the sensor performance of these membranes obtaining an effective charge collection at the oxide-electrolyte interface will be related to the microstructural surface [6].
Fig. 5
Download: Download high-res image (869KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 5. AFM images of CeTiO3 ceramic films annealed at (a) 700 °C, (b) 800 °C and (c) 900 °C.

Immersion of an EIS sensor in an electrolyte solution gives rise to the accumulation of ions at the oxide/electrolyte interface because of differences in electrochemical potential. The amount of charge stored at the oxide surface of an EIS capacitive sensor may be controlled by modulating the electric potential of the gate oxide corresponding to the electrolyte potential. Therefore, an EIS sensor makes sensitive to pH. The flat-band voltage (VFB) is one of the most important parameter in solid-state semiconductor sensor, and it is defined as [28]:
(1)
where Eref is the reference electrode potential, Ψ0 is the surface potential across the electrode/oxide interface, χsol is the surface dipole potential of the electrolyte solution, ϕSi is the work function of Si, q is the electrical charge of an electron, Cox and Qox are the oxide capacitance and accumulated charge in the oxide, respectively, and Qss is the interface state charge at the interface between the oxide and semiconductor. Aside from Ψ0, which leads to the EIS capacitive device sensitive to the solution, all terms are constant values. An EIS capacitive structure responses the variations in the Ψ0 item as a result of difference in the surface protonation/deprotonation reaction of the oxide corresponding to pH. This reaction can be explained by using the site-binding model to describe the equilibrium between the protons and amphoteric surface sites in an electrolyte solution [29]. The proton exchange at the oxide/electrolyte interface complies with the Gouy–Chapman–Stern model, which includes the Helmholtz model and the Gouy–Chapman model. The electric double-layer capacitance of an oxide electrode immersed in an aqueous electrolyte consists of a Helmholtz-layer capacitance or Stern capacitance, which is a constant capacitance (~ 20 μF/cm2), and a Gouy–Chapman capacitance or diffuse-layer capacitance, which is a variable capacitance. A detailed description of the relationship between the surface potential (Ψ0) and the bulk pH (pHBulk) has been derived by Bergveld [30], it can be expressed:
(2)
where k is the Boltzmann constant, T is the absolute temperature, α is a dimensionless sensitivity parameter that modulates between 0 and 1, denoting the equivalent capacitance (Cdiff) of the electrical double layer and the intrinsic proton buffer capacity (βint) of the oxide interface. If α is very close to 1, an ISFET or EIS sensor has the theoretical maximum sensitivity of 59.2 mV/pH at 298 K, which represents the familiar Nernst limiting value.
To estimate the sensing performance of CeTiO3 EIS capacitive sensors annealed at three RTA temperatures, we measured a group of C–V curves performed in the range of pH 2–12. Fig. 6(a)–(c) show the C–V curves of the CeTiO3 EIS capacitive sensors treated with the three RTA temperatures, tested in buffer solutions ranging from pH 2 to pH 12. We have defined the reference voltage (Vref) from the applied voltages to obtain a related normalization capacitance of 0.5 at each pH buffer solution. In C–V curves, Vref shifts from the right direction to the left direction performed in the pH range of 2–12, respectively, demonstrate these graphs, which is the decrease in the surface potential. The surface potential strongly corresponds to oxide membrane and pH buffer solutions; thus, the Vref changed for various pH buffer solutions. On the other hand, the distorted C–V curves were observed in CeTiO3 ceramic membranes owing to the presence of an interfacial layer forming interface traps at the CeTiO3-Si interface [31], which is confirmed by AES analysis. The insets of Fig. 6(a)–(c) show the Vref versus pH plots for the CeTiO3 EIS capacitive sensors prepared at the three RTA temperatures. The slope and the linear regression of these graphs were employed to evaluate the sensitivity and linearity of the sensor, respectively. The pH sensitivity of CeTiO3 EIS capacitive sensors was 62.04, 73.6, and 59.27 mV/pH for the RTA temperatures of 700, 800 and 900 °C, respectively. Among these RTA temperatures, the EIS capacitive sensor after annealing at the 800 °C exhibited the highest pH sensitivity, which is higher than the theoretical Nernst value of 59.2 mV/pH. This result may be attributed this RTA temperature to the formation of a thinner interfacial layer as well as a rougher surface and the increase in the change from Ce4+ to Ce3+ in the Ce oxidation state. The pH sensitivity of an ISFET or EIS sensor is mainly related to the number of active sites on the surface of the oxide based on the site-binding model [29]. An increased the surface roughness causes a high number of active sites and thus resulting in a higher pH sensitivity. In addition, the CeTiO3 film containing different ratios of Ce3+ will occur various redox activities, which is proven from the XPS results. The CeTiO3 ceramic film with Ti content improves the redox activity. The redox reaction in anhydrous and hydrous cerium oxides can be expressed as follow:
(3)
(4)
Fig. 6
Download: Download high-res image (1MB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 6. A typical set of normalized C-V curves for the CeTiO3 EIS sensor annealed at (a) 700 °C, (b) 800 °C and (c) 900 °C, measured at the pH range of 2–12. Inset: reference voltage as a function of pH for CeTiO3 EIS sensors annealed at (a) 700 °C, (b) 800 °C and (c) 900 °C.

In hydrous system, the transfer of three protons per two electrons takes place through the redox reaction, which gets the slope of 73.6 mV/pH in a reference voltage versus pH plot. It is believed that the association of (CeO2OH)- with the ‘extra’ proton arises from the protonation with water in Ce2O3. In this study, our CeTiO3 ceramic membrane demonstrated superior pH detection sensitivity compared with those of other materials commonly demonstrated for ISFET and EIS sensors, such as Ta2O5 (56.6 mV/pH) [7], TiO2 (58.21 mV/pH) [8], ZrO2 (58 mV/pH) [32], HfO2 (~ 55 mV/pH) [9], and Y2O3 (54.5 mV/pH) [10].
The hysteresis and drift phenomena of a gate oxide in an ISFET and EIS sensor affect its sensing performance. The hysteresis behavior can be described by using a surface-site model [33], presuming that a partial surface sites in oxide film will respond slowly to changes in pH due to the existence of defects (e.g., imperfections). These defects cause porosity to produce interior sites reacting with the ions in an aqueous solution. These CeTiO3 EIS capacitive sensors were immersed in various pH buffer solutions under an alternating cycle (pH 7→pH 4→pH 7→pH 10→pH 7), for 5 m in each solution. Here, the definition of hysteresis voltage is determined from the difference in reference voltage between the initial (first pH 7) and terminal (last pH 7) voltages in the pH cycle. Fig. 7(a) depicts the hysteresis curves of CeTiO3 EIS capacitive sensors annealed at three different RTA temperatures. The hysteresis voltage of the CeTiO3 EIS capacitive sensors was estimated to be 15.1, 1 and 5.1 mV for annealing at the 700, 800 and 900 °C, respectively. The EIS capacitive sensor treated at the 800 °C exhibited the smallest hysteresis voltage, whereas that at the 700 °C had the largest hysteresis voltage among these temperatures. The surface defects (or vacancies) of the film can result in some ions attaching to its surface and, thereby putting off the response to the reference voltage. The ceramic film annealed at the 800 °C in O2 gas might repair the crystal defects in the film, hence reducing the attached ions on its surface in the solution.
Fig. 7
Download: Download high-res image (469KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 7. (a) Hysteresis characteristics of the CeTiO3 EIS sensors annealed at three RTA temperatures in pH loop 7→4→7→10→7. (b) Drift rate of the CeTixOy EIS sensors annealed at three RTA temperatures in the pH 7 solution.

Aside from the hysteresis effect, the signal drift is critically an important factor to evaluate the instability of an ISFET or EIS device. The physical model, has been proposed by Jamasb et al. [34], was used to interpret drift characteristics. This model is ascribed to the chemical modification of the oxide surface leading to the change in surface active sites over time, thereby causing a monotonic temporal increase in the threshold voltage. Fig. 7(b) shows the drift characteristics of the CeTiO3 EIS capacitive sensors annealed at three different RTA temperatures and measured in solution at pH 7 for 12 h. The change in the reference voltage (ΔVref) is defined as ΔVref = Vref(t)–Vref(0). The degradation slope of reference voltage change represents the EIS instability. The drift rate of the CeTiO3 EIS capacitive sensors was 0.89, 0.35 and 0.72 mV/h for RTA at the 700, 800 and 900 °C, respectively. The CeTiO3 EIS capacitive sensor after annealing at the 800 °C had the best long-term stability, while the capacitive sensor annealed at the 700 °C showed a serious drift rate. The signal drift effect might originate from lattice defects (e.g., vacancies or dangling bonds) capturing clusters of ions. We suspect that the less-pronounced drift behavior at the 800 °C stemmed from a lower number of crystal defects; that is, the optimized RTA temperature in the film could effectively diminish such defects. Moreover, a higher drift rate of the 700 °C-annealed film may be contributed to a larger density of buried surface sites and/or traps because of the presence of a high number of crystal defects.
4. Conclusion
The impact of postannealing treatment on the structural properties and sensing performance of CeTO3 ceramic membranes deposited on Si substrate is explored in this paper. The crystal structures, chemical compositions, elemental depth profiles, and surface morphologies of the ceramic films have been investigated through a combination of XRD, XPS, AES, and AFM analyses, respectively. The structural properties of the CeTO3 ceramic films were strongly correlated to their sensing performance. The CeTO3 EIS capacitive sensor annealed at the 800 °C exhibited a higher sensitivity of 73.6 mV/pH, a lower hysteresis voltage of 1 mV, and a smaller drift rate of 0.35 mV/h relative to those at other RTA temperatures. The CeTO3 ceramic film is a very promising candidate as a sensing membrane for solid-state pH sensor and biosensor applications.
