Click the pair button to affiliate your institution with your personal account

OR SEARCH CITATIONS

Your access to this publication has been provided byLearn More

Received

Accepted

Published

A platform based on a highly selective and sensitive detection device functionalized with a well-designed artificial biointerface is required for versatile biosensors. We develop a molecularly imprinted polymer (MIP)-coated gate field-effect transistor (FET) biosensor for low-concentration glucose detection in biological fluid samples such as tears in an enzyme-free manner. The MIP includes glucose templates (GluMIP), in which glucose binds to vinylphenylboronic acid in the copolymerized membrane, resulting in the change in the density of molecular charges of the phenylboronic acid (PBA)/glucose complex. The FET biosensor can detect small biomolecules as long as biomolecular recognition events cause intrinsic changes in the density of molecular charges. As a result, the changes in the output voltage detected using the GluMIP-based FET sensor are fitted to the Langmuir adsorption isotherm equation at various concentrations of sugars, showing the low detection limit of 3 μM and the high sensitivity of 115 mV/decade from 100 μM to 4 mM glucose. On the basis of the equation, the stability constant (Ka) of PBA with glucose is calculated and found to markedly increase toKa= 1192 M–1, which is higher by a factor of a few hundreds thanKa= 4.6 M–1obtained by nonelectrical detection methods. Moreover, the GluMIP-coated gate FET sensor shows an approximately 200-fold higher selectivity for glucose than for fructose. This is because glucose binds to PBA more selectively than fructose in the templates, resulting in the generation of negative charges. The electrical properties of the MIP-coated electrode are also evaluated by measuring capacitance. Our work suggests a new strategy of designing a platform based on the MIP-coated gate FET biosensor, which is suitable for a highly selective, sensitive, enzyme-free biosensing system.

This publication is licensed under the terms of your
                            institutional subscription.Request reuse permissions.

Article subjects are automatically applied from the ACS Subject Taxonomy and describe the scientific concepts and themes of the article.

Article keywords are supplied by the authors and highlight key terms and topics
                        of the paper.

Figure 1. (a) Schematic diagram of the GluMIP-coated gate FET. The Au electrode with the GluMIP interface was extended from the gate of the FET. (b) Chemical structure of the copolymerized glucose-imprinted MIP hydrogel.

Figure 2. Changes in capacitance of the GluMIP interface upon adding glucose in the range from 10 μM to 10 mM. The GluMIP membrane was coated on the Au electrode.

Figure 3. Changes inVGof the GluMIP-coated gate FET at various pHs (100 mM sodium phosphate buffer).VGwas determined at a constantIDof 1 mA andVDof 2.5 V.

Figure 4. ΔVTupon adding glucose at 0 (black), 10 μM (red), 100 μM (blue), 1 mM (green), and 10 mM (orange) analyzed fromVG–IDelectrical characteristics.

Figure 5. ΔVoutof the GluMIP-coated FET upon adding sugars at 1 mM in turn. Each sugar was added at times indicated by arrows (Glu, glucose; Fru, fructose; and Suc, sucrose).

Figure 6. ΔVoutof the GluMIP-coated FET upon adding sugars (red, glucose; blue, fructose; and green, sucrose). Each sugar was added at time indicated by arrows in the range from 10 μM to 20 mM. As a control sensor, the NIP-coated FET was prepared (black).

Figure 7. ΔVoutof the GluMIP-coated FET for each sugar concentration (red, glucose; blue, fructose; and green, sucrose). (a) Plots were approximated by the Langmuir absorption isotherm. (b) ΔVoutvalues were plotted for the changes in semilogarithmic sugar concentrations. The slope of an approximately straight line means the detection sensitivity for a sugar.

The Supporting Information is available free of charge on theACS Publications websiteat DOI:10.1021/acsami.8b13317.

Schematic illustration of MIPs with PBA; XPS spectra for C 1s and Au 4f5/2, 4f7/2; ATR–FTIR spectra of Au and GluMIP-coated Au electrodes; image of copolymerized hydrogels; thickness profile of GluMIP-coated Au obtained using the stylus-type profiler; and source follower circuit for the real-time FET measurement system (PDF)

Most electronic Supporting Information files are available without a subscription to ACS Web Editions. Such files may be downloaded by article for research use (if there is a public use license linked to the relevant article, that license may permit other uses). Permission may be obtained from ACS for other uses through requests via the RightsLink permission system:http://pubs.acs.org/page/copyright/permissions.html.

Part of this study was supported by the Program for Creating STart-ups from Advanced Research and Technology (START program) promoted by the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology, Japan.

This article references
            48 other publications.

This article is cited by 42 publications.

Article Views are the COUNTER-compliant sum of full text article downloads since November 2008 (both PDF and HTML) across all institutions and individuals. These metrics are regularly updated to reflect usage leading up to the last few days.

Citations are the number of other articles citing this article, calculated by Crossref and updated daily.Find more information about Crossref citation counts.

The Altmetric Attention Score is a quantitative measure of the attention that a research article has received online. Clicking on the donut icon will load a page at altmetric.com with additional details about the score and the social media presence for the given article. Find more information onthe Altmetric Attention Score and how the score is calculated.

Please be aware that pubs.acs.org is undergoing maintenance from Saturday February 1 to Monday Febraury 3, that may have an impact on your experience. During this time, you may not be able to access certain features like login, purchasing single articles, saving searches or running existing saved searches, modifying your e-Alert preferences, or accessing Librarian administrative functions. We appreciate your patience as we continue to improve the ACS Publications platform.

Low-molecular-weight biomolecules are highly recognized as significant biomarker candidates in the field of in vitro diagnostics (IVD).(1)For the detection of small biomolecules, conventional methods require enzymatic reactions and secondary antibodies with fluorescent dyes in immunoassays.(2−7)However, fluorescent conjugates may not be formed when the target biomolecules, that is, antigens, are smaller.(8,9)Although enzymes and antibodies have been utilized in a wide range of scientific fields and their applications have been recognized as the global standard, the use of these biomacromolecules is problematic owing to their fragility, high-cost and time-consuming production, and the difficulty of quality control of their production. Therefore, an artificial and functional membrane based on a standard concept should become a platform as molecular recognition sites for small biomarkers.

Molecularly imprinted polymers (MIPs) are artificial materials that can recognize biomolecules.(10−16)Molecular imprinting is a template polymerization technique involving the copolymerization of a cross-linker and a target molecule or its derivative covalently or noncovalently bound to a functional monomer. After removing the template molecule, cavities are imprinted in the polymer matrix, which are complementary to the template molecule in shape and size and capable of template molecule recognition. Imprinted polymers show a strong binding affinity for low-molecular-weight biomolecules such as bisphenol A(13,16)and histamine.(14)However, an optical system is mostly required to detect signals from target biomolecules, resulting in large systems, troublesome procedures, and qualitative data. Moreover, MIP membranes were used for glucose recognition by a cyclic voltammetry method. In this method, [Fe(CN)6]3–/4–is mostly used as a probe for the redox reaction through the template cavities in a MIP membrane with a Au electrode in a measurement solution.(17,18)Also, a fluorescent dye is copolymerized in a MIP membrane to detect glucose.(19,20)Therefore, a signal transducer, which enables the label-free detection of biomolecules, is required to directly and quantitatively analyze small biomolecules targeted in MIP membranes.

Biologically coupled gate field-effect transistors (bio-FETs) in a miniaturized system show good performance in quantitatively detecting intrinsic biomolecular charges. The principle of bio-FETs is based on potentiometric detection on the gate, where specific binding to target biomolecules occurs accompanied by their charge changes, resulting in their detection. In particular, bio-FETs can directly detect even small biomolecules as long as such biomolecules have intrinsic molecular charges. Bisphenol A was quantitatively detected by open sandwich-based FETs,(21)and MIP-coated FETs directly and electrically detected small biomolecules such as histamine and oligosaccharides.(22,23)Additionally, cellular respiration was monitored in real time as the change in the concentration of even the smallest ion, H+, at the cell/gate nanogap interface using cell-based FETs.(24−26)Thus, the principle of detection by bio-FETs is based on the most adequate signal translator for the direct recognition of small biomolecules selectively captured in MIPs.

Electrochemical sensors can be applied as a bioanalytical tool in IVD. Glucose sensors are widely used to monitor glucose levels in blood in diabetic mellitus patients. Most glucose sensors utilize enzymatic reactions between glucose oxidase and glucose owing to the high selectivity, convenience, and low cost of such devices, the detection principle of which can be used to analyze glucose levels with a sensitivity of about 100 mg/dL (about 5.5 mM) in blood.(1,4,7)However, conventional glucose sensors have several disadvantages; commercially available glucose sensors require blood sampling to measure blood glucose levels, which may be painful, and their detection sensitivity is insufficient at low glucose levels in biological fluids such as tears, which can be used for noninvasive glucose measurement instead of blood samples. In fact, the glucose levels in tears are about one-hundredth to one-tenth of those in blood.(27)

On the other hand, nonenzymatic glucose sensors have been proposed by applying the equilibrium reaction of the phenylboronic acid (PBA) molecule with sugars. PBA has attracted considerable attention in the field of molecular recognition as it can form stable esters with various biomolecules containing 1,2 or 1,3 cis-diol/polyol groups, such as sugars, in aqueous systems (Scheme S1a).(28,29)However, PBA exhibits a lower affinity for glucose than for other mono- and disaccharides such as fructose and sucrose. To solve this problem of lower affinity for glucose, PBA-based MIPs should be used for nonenzymatic glucose sensing. The esterification of PBA/diol is a reversible reaction, which can be controlled by adjusting the pH of the solution. Thus, the template can easily be extracted from the polymer in the preparation of MIPs by simply adjusting the pH of the solution (Scheme S1b). Moreover, in the esterification, PBA switches from a nonionic form to an anionic form (Scheme S1a). Hence, the change in the density of molecular charges induced by the saccharide-to-PBA binding can be detected by FET biosensors.(30,31)

In this study, we propose a glucose transistor with a well-designed artificial biointerface, namely, the glucose-template MIP-coated gate FET (GluMIP-FET), as a nonenzymatic glucose sensor. In particular, the electrical properties of the GluMIP-coated Au gate electrode were investigated by measuring capacitance, and then the detection selectivity and sensitivity of the GluMIP-coated gate FET to glucose was evaluated, focusing on the stability constant of the glucose/PBA complex.

The monomer solution, which included 2-hydroxyethylmethacrylate (HEMA) as the main chain monomer and 4-vinylphenylboronic acid (VPBA) as the sugar recognition monomer, was directly put onto the Au surface and copolymerized in an inert gas atmosphere. The conceptual structure of the GluMIP-FET is shown inFigure1a, and the hydrogel was randomly copolymerized as poly(HEMA-ran-DMAPM-ran-VPBA-ran-AA), as shown inFigure1b. Before copolymerization, VPBA was expected to have negative charges upon binding to glucose. Glucose molecules were washed out with an acid solution after copolymerization, resulting in cavities formed in the MIP. As shown inFigure S1, which was obtained by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), the composition of carbon increased, whereas the composition of gold was hardly found, after grafting the GluMIP hydrogel onto the Au surface. Also, the B–O stretching (1337 cm–1) and the formation of boronate ester (654 cm–1), which were included in the GluMIP hydrogel, were observed from the spectra obtained by attenuated total reflection–Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (ATR–FTIR), as shown inFigure S2. Thus, the GluMIP hydrogel was successfully grafted on the Au gate electrode.

Phase separation was observed with the GluMIP hydrogel appearing white and the nonimprinted polymer (NIP) hydrogel maintaining its transparency (Figure S3). This may be because the hydrophilic monomer, which is VPBA that became charged upon its binding to glucose, was phase-separated with the hydrophobic monomers in GluMIP, whereas the NIP hydrogel was copolymerized by the uncharged monomers.

After polymerizing and removing the glucose template, the capacitance of the GluMIP hydrogel on the Au electrode was evaluated using an LCR meter.Figure2shows the changes in the capacitance of the GluMIP hydrogel (ΔCGluMIP) at each concentration of glucose. The permittivity of the GluMIP hydrogel depends on the bias voltage; therefore, ΔCGluMIPwas monitored in real time at 200 Hz frequency and 0 V at various glucose concentrations. The data are plotted inFigure2as the averages of capacitances monitored for 20 min at each glucose concentration, with the standard errors shown. As a result,CGluMIPincreased with increasing glucose concentration, which means that the GluMIP hydrogel swelled owing to the increase in the density of negative charges based on the glucose/PBA complexes. However, ΔCGluMIPof the GluMIP hydrogel at various glucose concentrations was not very large, compared with that of the hydrophobic polymer.(32,33)The MIP hydrogel used in this study included HEMA as the main chain monomer, which is a hydrophilic polymer even before adding glucose. This is the reason why the MIP hydrogel basically included a large number of water molecules, that is, the change in the permittivity of the MIP hydrogel was almost negligible even after adding glucose. This is also because the cross-linking density in the GluMIP was higher in this study than in our previous study.(31)Therefore, the swelling rate of the GluMIP hydrogel was relatively low owing to its intrinsic hydrophilic property and relatively high cross-linking density.

The pH and glucose responsivities of the GluMIP-coated gate FET were investigated using a semiconductor parameter analyzer. In this case, no glucose was introduced into the GluMIP hydrogel.Figure3shows the changes inVGfrom pH 6 to 12 atIDof 1 mA andVDof 2.5 V, which was analyzed from theVG–IDelectrical characteristics obtained in 100 mM sodium phosphate buffer with different pHs. The plotted data were fitted by the sigmoid function described as(1)whereais the minimumVG,bis defined as the Hill coefficient,cis the pKa, anddis the maximumVG.VGshifted from −394 to −294 mV within pHs 6–12. PBA in the GluMIP without glucose keeps the equilibrium reaction between states 1 and 2 (Scheme S1a), depending on the pH. The FET can detect the change in the molecular charges on the basis of the equilibrium state of PBA at various pHs. In addition, the inflection point in the sigmoid curve is represented as pKa; thus, pKawas determined as 9.2 using the GluMIP-coated gate FET, although the pKaof PBA was in the range from 8.6 to 8.8 in previous works.(34−36)This may be due to the measurement system and its environment. That is, the equilibrium state based on the microenvironmental pH in the GluMIP around the gate/solution interface is different from that in the bulk solutions. The most rigorous molecular dynamics simulations have demonstrated that counterions form 2–3 layers accompanied by an electrostatic interaction with polarized water molecules at the substrate/solution interface, where the type of interaction depends on the ionic strength, different from that in a bulk solution.(37−40)

Moreover, the glucose responsivity of the GluMIP-coated gate FET was analyzed from theVG–IDelectrical characteristics.Figure4shows ΔVTanalyzed from theVG–IDelectrical characteristics of the GluMIP-coated gate FETs at various glucose concentrations. ΔVTshifted in the positive direction atIDof 1 mA with increasing glucose concentration from 10 μM to 10 mM. The positive shift of ΔVTmeans the increase of negative charges at the gate of FET devices; therefore, the increase of negative charges caused by the formation of the glucose/PBA complex was detected using the GluMIP-coated gate FET on the basis of the increase in glucose concentration. In a previous report, theVG–IDelectrical characteristics were evaluated using the stimulus-responsive polymer-gel-modified glucose FET sensor.(32)In this case, ΔVTshifted in the negative direction after the addition of 5 g/L glucose, which was opposite to our results. This is because the previous work demonstrated the change in the capacitance of the gel, which was based on the deswelling to swelling of the polymer gel. That is, the change in capacitance as the output was largely determined using FET devices, although the change in the molecular charges of the gel was slightly included in the output signal in the previous work. In this study, the capacitance of the GluMIP hydrogel hardly changed after adding glucose (Figure2); therefore, the increase in negative charges based on the formation of the glucose/PBA complex was detected as larger signals on the basis of the principle of the field effect than that resulting from the swelling of the GluMIP hydrogel after glucose addition.

Figure5shows ΔVoutto various saccharides detected using the GluMIP-FET. Glucose, fructose, and sucrose at 1 mM were added onto the GluMIP-coated Au gate electrode. Each sugar was added onto an identical electrode in turn to examine the potential responsivity to sugars and the selectivity to glucose detected using the GluMIP-FET. ΔVoutis obtained as the change in source-gate voltage (ΔVGS) through the source follower circuit, which corresponds to −ΔVT. As a result, ΔVouthardly changed upon adding fructose or sucrose but shifted in the negative direction by about 100 mV upon adding glucose. The negative shift inVoutresulted from the negative charges of the glucose/PBA complex formed in the GluMIP hydrogel. Thus, the GluMIP-FET enabled the selective detection of glucose. Moreover,Figure6shows ΔVoutof the GluMIP-FET with the change in the concentration of each sugar. ΔVoutclearly decreased upon adding glucose from 10 μM to 20 mM, whereas other sensors did not respond upon adding each sugar. In particular, ΔVoutfor the NIP-FET shifted in the positive direction upon adding glucose, although the signal shifts were very small. The positive shifts would be due to the increase in the capacitance of NIP because the swelling of NIP was induced upon the addition of glucose solutions, resulting in the increase in the permittivity of NIP. This means that the response of the GluMIP-FET to glucose may slightly include the change in the capacitance of the polymer, although the signal contamination is assumed to be small. Note that NIP did not have the glucose template supported by PBA, but it included PBA. Thus, the change in the shape of the MIP membrane depending on its swelling/deswelling was not so large owing to the more dense cross-linking, which prevented more water molecules from invading into the MIP hydrogel. However, the GluMIP-FET detected the increase in the density of negative charges on the basis of the glucose/PBA complexes with high sensitivity.

To analyze the binding affinity and kinetics of the GluMIP-FET for each sugar, ΔVoutvalues of GluMIP-FETs were plotted against the change in the concentration of each sugar inFigure7on the basis of the data obtained inFigure6. These analyzed curves seem to be approximated by the Langmuir adsorption isotherm. As shown by the equilibrium reaction between PBA and a diol compound such as sugars inScheme S1a, the FET devices can detect molecular charges of tetrahedral PBAs, which maintain the equilibrium reaction with noncharged trigonal PBAs. The binding affinity of PBA for diol is pH-dependent, and it is generally understood that the VPB(OH)3-complex is considerably more stable than the VPB(OH)2complex;(36)therefore, the equilibrium reaction between PBA and sugar can be represented as(2)

According toeq2, the binding constant (Ka) and the law of conservation of mass can be represented as(3)(4)where [PBA–sugar]chargedmaxindicates the maximum concentration of the charged PBA–sugar conjugate, corresponding to the total number of charged PBA molecules with diol binding to sugar. Consideringeqs2–4, ΔVoutbased on the equilibrium reaction is approximated to the Langmuir adsorption isotherm as(5)where ΔVoutmaxindicates the maximum ΔVoutsaturated at higher concentrations of sugar, which is analyzed fromFigure7. Note that the change in the concentration of sugar ([sugar]) contributes to the change in the charge of the PBA–sugar complex (ΔQco) in the GluMIP hydrogel, as shown in our previous work.(23)ΔVoutis basically calculated on the basis of ΔQcoat a constant capacitance (ΔCGluMIP≈ 0). Considering our previous work,(23)ΔVoutcan be evaluated on the basis of ΔQco, that is, [sugar], when ΔCGluMIPis almost negligible in terms of the change in the concentration of sugar. In fact, ΔCGluMIPhardly changed even after adding glucose (Figure2); therefore, ΔVoutcan be related to [sugar] as ineq5. According toeq5,Kaand the decision coefficients (R2) of the fitting curve to each sugar concentration were calculated from the data shown inFigure7, as shown inTable1. Considering the calculated data ofR2, ΔVoutof the GluMIP-FETs well fitted to the Langmuir plots for each sugar concentration. Moreover,Kaobtained in this study was much higher than that previously reported,(28)where theKavalues for the competitive reaction of sugars with alizarin red S in terms of PBA molecules in a buffer solution (pH 7.4) were calculated to be 4.6 M–1for glucose, 160 M–1for fructose, and 0.67 M–1for sucrose without using MIPs. Thus,Kafor glucose (1192 M–1) detected using the GluMIP-FET was approximately 250 times higher than that (4.6 M–1) previously reported. Furthermore, the detection selectivity of glucose to fructose or sucrose (Sglu/fruorSglu/suc) is defined byKaas(6)Sglu/fruandSglu/scuin this study were calculated to be 5.6 and 4.4, and those in ref(25)were 0.029 and 6.9, respectively. From these calculations, the detection selectivity of glucose to fructose using the GluMIP-FET was about 200 times higher than that in previous methods. However, the detection selectivity of glucose to sucrose was almost unchanged even when using the GluMIP-FET. This is because sucrose is a disaccharide composed of the monosaccharides glucose and fructose; therefore, the GluMIP-FET may have recognized the glucose structure in sucrose. Nevertheless, this does not mean that the detection selectivity of glucose to sucrose with the PBA–diol binding has been lost when using the GluMIP-FET. Thus, the well-designed artificial MIP interface is very effective for increasing not only the binding constant but also the detection selectivity for low-molecular-weight biomolecules because the FET device can directly detect molecular charges. Moreover,Figure7b shows ΔVoutfor the base 10 logarithm of sugar concentrations on the basis of the data shown inFigure7a. The detection sensitivities of the GluMIP-FET to the sugars in the range of 100 μM to 4 mM were 114.8 mV/decade for glucose, 8.6 mV/decade for fructose, and 5.1 mV/decade for sucrose, respectively. Thus, the detection sensitivity to glucose was about 15–20 times higher than those to other sugars owing to the well-designed artificial MIP interface that provided the glucose specificity. Moreover, the limit of detection (LOD) for glucose using the GluMIP-FET in this study was predicted to be about 3 μM from the semilogarithmic plots on the basis of the Kaiser limit theory.(41)Therefore, the GluMIP-FET can detect glucose at a low concentration in biological fluids such as tears, where the glucose levels are about one-hundredth to one-tenth of those in blood.(27)Thus, the well-designed artificial MIP interface is very effective for increasing not only the binding constant but also the detection selectivity for low-molecular-weight biomolecules, which results from the FET device enabling the direct detection of molecular charges.

Generally, FET biosensors can detect molecular charges within the Debye length (diffusion layer) at the electrolyte/gate interface. The LOD of FET biosensors depends on the Debye length,(42−44)as expressed by(7)whereIis the ionic strength of an electrolyte, ε0is the permittivity of free space, εris the dielectric constant,kBis the Boltzmann constant,Tis the absolute temperature,NAis the Avogadro number, andeis the elementary charge.(45)For example, the Debye length is calculated to be 0.75 nm even in a 150 mM NaCl solution. This is why the Debye length would be about 1 nm at most in this study, where 100 mM sodium phosphate buffer was used as the measurement solution. Therefore, the change in the molecular charges of the glucose/PBA complex formed inside the GluMIP-coated gate, which was in the vicinity of the Au surface, namely, in the diffusion layer, should have been detected using the potentiometric sensor, owing to the hydrophilic polymer interface. Although the thickness of the GluMIP membrane was about 200 nm, which was measured using a mechanical profilometer (Figure S4), and not precisely controlled in this study, the effect of the thickness of the polymer interface on the performances of FET biosensors will be investigated by controlling the thickness and examined by focusing on the Debye length. In this case, surface-initiated atom transfer radical polymerization allows the formation of a MIP interface with a well-defined densely packed structure on a substrate, whose thickness is precisely controlled.(46,47)Thus, the well-defined polymer film, whose thickness is precisely controlled by SI-ATRP, contributes to the quantitative detection of signals by FET biosensors and provides valuable information for the fabrication of novel bioanalytical devices.

As monomers in MIP polymerization, HEMA (MW = 130.14) and 4-vinylphenylboronic acid (VPBA, MW = 147.97) were purchased from Tokyo Chemical Industries (Japan), andN-3-(dimethylamino)propylmethacrylamide (DMAPM, MW = 170.25),N,N-methylenebisacrylamide (MBA, MW = 154.17), and acrylic acid (AA, MW = 72.06) were obtained from Wako Pure Chemical Ltd (Japan). AA was neutralized to pH 6.5 with 1 M NaOH and used at approximately 6.5% (w/w) in the reaction solution. Copolymerization was initiated with potassium persulfate (KPS, Wako Pure Chemical Ltd.) and tetramethylethylenediamine (TEMED, Wako Pure Chemical Ltd). As samples, glucose, fructose, and sucrose were selected for electrical measurements (Wako Pure Chemical Ltd). Ultrapure water (Ul-pure, Komatsu Electronics Co., Ltd.) was used in all experiments.

A Au thin film with a thickness of 100 nm/15 nm was sputtered on a white cut glass slide (Matsunami Glass Ind., Ltd.). A Ti layer was utilized as the adhesive layer between the Au film and the glass slide. A transparent polycarbonate ring (inner diameter of 18 mm/outer diameter of 20 mm) was encapsulated on the Au thin film using an epoxy resin (ZC-203T, Pelnox Ltd., Japan) except for the sensing surface. The Au substrate was cleaned using a UV ozone cleaner (MEIWAFOSIS Co., Ltd., Japan) for 60 min following immersion in Piranha solution (30% vol H2O2/H2SO4= 3:7 by volume) for 5 min to remove organic compounds. The glucose-imprinted hydrogel was copolymerized onto the Au substrate. A monomer solution was prepared as follows: HEMA (0.20 g), DMAPM (0.10 g), VPBA (0.02 g), MBA (0.02 g), and glucose as the template (0.01 g) were diluted with deionized water to form solutions with a weight of 1.0 g including 6.5% (w/w) AA. The monomer solution was agitated with a vortex mixer and degassed by bubbling nitrogen for 30 min. After degassing, the monomer solution was placed on ice; into the solution, 2 μL of TEMED and 5 μL of KPS solution (50 mg/mL) were mixed by gently pipetting. Polymerization was initiated by pouring 5 μL of the monomer solution on the Au surface, which was covered with a polyethylene terephthalate (PET) film and was then polymerized overnight in a desiccator in nitrogen atmosphere. After copolymerization, the PET film was peeled off, and then template-glucose molecules and remaining monomers were washed by immersing the substrate in 0.05 M HCl/50% vol methanol solution and then with ultrapure water. The prepared MIP gel was equilibrated in 100 mM sodium phosphate buffer (pH 9.0) before electrochemical measurements. On the other hand, a NIP was prepared on the Au substrate as a control polymer, which was prepared by the same method as that for MIP except for adding glucose as the template.

To electrochemically analyze the GluMIP coated on the Au electrode, the changes in capacitance were measured at various glucose concentrations from 10 μM to 10 mM. Capacitance was measured using an LCR meter (E4980A, Keysight technologies) at a frequency of 200 kHz and a bias voltage of 0 V. Sodium phosphate buffer at 100 mM (pH 9.0) was used for the measurements, which was connected with a Ag/AgCl reference electrode in the saturated KCl solution through an agar-based salt bridge.

In this study, an extended-gate FET was used to measure sugar responses, the GluMIP-coated Au electrode of which was extended from the gate of a junction FET (Toshiba), as shown inFigure1. A shift of the threshold voltage (ΔVT) was measured at a drain current (ID) of 1 mA and a drain voltage (VD) of 2.5 V in 100 mM sodium phosphate buffer (pH 9.0) at room temperature using a semiconductor parameter analyzer (B1500A, Keysight Technologies). To measure the pH titration curve, gate voltage (VG)–IDelectrical characteristics were measured at various pHs from 6 to 12, and then ΔVGat 1 mA ofIDwas plotted as ΔVTat various pHs. Moreover, changes in the surface potential (ΔVout) of the GluMIP-coated Au electrode were measured in real time using a source follower circuit,(48)as shown inFigure S5, where the Ag/AgCl reference electrode with the saturated KCl solution (3.3 M), which was connected to a measurement solution through a salt bridge, was maintained at 0 V by connecting to the ground. Electrical measurements were performed at constantIDof 700 μA andVDof 2 V. A 1.5 mL of 100 mM sodium phosphate buffer (pH 9.0) was poured into the chemically modified Au gate surface surrounded by a 20 mm diameter polycarbonate ring. After the stabilization ofVout, titrated solutions of each sugar from 5 μM to 20 mM were prepared in the buffer solution. To suppress background noises generated during the sample addition, the volume of a sample solution added was determined to be 1/100 of the total volume of the measurement solution.

In this study, we developed a MIP-coated gate FET biosensor for a low-level-glucose detection in biological fluid samples such as tears in an enzyme-free manner. The MIP included glucose templates (GluMIP), in which glucose bound to VPBA in the copolymerized membrane, resulting in the change in the molecular charge of the PBA/glucose complex. The FET biosensor has an advantage in that it enables the detection of small biomolecules as long as biomolecular recognition events cause changes in the density of intrinsic molecular charges. As a result, the changes in the output voltage detected using the GluMIP-based FET sensor were fitted to the Langmuir adsorption isotherm equation at various concentrations of sugars, showing the low detection limit of 3 μM and the high sensitivity of 115 mV/decade from 100 μM to 4 mM glucose. On the basis of the equation, the stability constant (Ka) of PBA with glucose was calculated and found to remarkably increase toKa= 1192 M–1, which was higher by a factor of a few hundreds thanKa= 4.6 M–1obtained by nonelectrical detection methods. Moreover, the GluMIP-coated gate FET sensor showed an approximately 200-fold higher selectivity for glucose than for fructose. This is because glucose bound to PBA more selectively than fructose in the templates, resulting in the generation of negative charges. The electrical properties of the MIP-coated electrode were also evaluated by measuring capacitance. Our work suggests a new strategy of designing a platform based on the MIP-coated gate FET biosensor, which is suitable for a highly selective, sensitive, enzyme-free biosensing system.