Dr. Aifeng Lv

Physikalisches Institut and Center for Nanotechnology (CeNTech), Universität Münster, Wilhelm-Klemm-Str. 10, 48149 Münster, Germany

Dr. Ming Wang

College of Chemistry, Beijing Normal University, Xinjiekouwaidajie Street 19, Beijing, 100875 P.R. China

Dr. Yandong Wang

Prof. Zhishan Bo

Corresponding Author

Prof. Lifeng Chi

Jiangsu Key Laboratory for Carbon-Based Functional Materials, Devices Functional Nano and Soft Materials Laboratory (FUNSOM), Soochow University, Renai Rd. 199, 215123 Suzhou, P.R. China

Give access

Share full-text access

Use the link below to share a full-text version of this article with your friends and colleagues.Learn more.

Share a link

The fixed sense: A H2S sensor based on a polymer field-effect transistor (see figure) is reported and the sensor shows high sensitivity, excellent selectivity, fast response, good reusability and can detect 1 ppb H2S. Sensitivity increases first and then decreases with thinner films, which is due to different changing rate of absorption and desorption of H2S molecules in the sensor.

Herein a H2S sensor based on a polymer field-effect transistor is reported and the sensor shows high sensitivity, excellent selectivity, fast response, and good operational stability. A concentration as low as 1 ppb H2S is detectable, which is to date the most sensitive H2S sensor based on organic semiconducting film. Thinning the thickness of active layer does not necessarily improve the sensitivity, but rather leads to the reduction of performance if the thickness is too low. Further analysis proposes a mechanism that the changing rate of absorption and desorption of H2S molecules is different when the thickness of active layer varies, indicating the necessity for thickness optimization.

Organic field-effect transistor (OFET)-based sensors have attracted great interest since the first report in the late 1980s due to the simple device configuration, ultralow cost and great potential for miniaturization and integration.1These advantages make OFET sensors the most promising electrical sensors which can realize smart systems with capabilities of detecting analytes and delivering a digital response.2To date, many types of gas sensors on the basis of OFETs have been successfully realized like the most reported ammonia (NH3),3nitrogen oxides (NO2/NO),4humidity,5sulfur dioxide (SO2),6etc. The OFET-based gas sensors rely on the interaction between active layers of OFETs and analytes, especially 1–2 nm active layers (conducting channel) above the gate dielectric.1b,1e,7Among the reported results, it has been found that thinning the active layer could significantly increase the sensing response due to strengthened interaction between analytes and conducting channel.3c,8Many methods such as Langmuir–Blodgett, self-assembly and dip-coating have been used to fabricate active layers with only 1–2 monolayers (MLs) to maximize this interaction. However, how film thickness affects the sensing response has not been systematically studied to date.

H2S is a toxic and flammable gas with a characteristic odor of rotten egg.9Concentration of H2S in unpolluted areas is usually less than 1 ppb released naturally through bacterial breakdown of organic matter in septic or sewer system.9a,10But industrial activities and places can generate a large quantity of H2S, such as coke production, petroleum/natural gas drilling and refining, wastewater treatment, kraft pulping mills and landfills. Long-term exposure to 5 ppb H2S can induce adverse health effects including respiratory, eye and nasal problems.11The gas will become extremely toxic when the concentration reaches 100 ppm. Therefore, monitoring H2S is of great importance for air-quality detection and defense/antiterrorist applications. However, very few H2S sensors, with only ppm-level detection and poor sensitivity, have been reported.12

OFETs based on polymers usually show poor performance due to their amorphous films as a result of long molecule chains which are easily bent and entangled with each other.13On the other hand, compared with small-molecule organic semiconducting (OSC) films, the looser polymer films have potential advantage for sensor application owing to their smaller barriers to the analytes.4a,14Here, we report a H2S sensor using a spirobifluorene-based polymer OFET. We show that thinning the thickness of the active layer does not simply favor an improved sensitivity, but can lead to a reduction of performance if the thickness is too low. Based on the observed data, we propose a mechanism and ascribe this phenomenon to different changing rate of absorption and desorption of H2S molecules in the sensor when the thickness of active layer varies. Therefore, an optimal thickness helps to retain enough analyte molecules in the film during the measurement. A 20 nm film shows the highest sensitivity, and the corresponding device exhibits the high sensitivity of 83 % in 5 s and 92 % in 15 s.12Additionally, this sensor presents excellent selectivity among ten analytes and good operational stability. A concentration as low as 1 ppb is detected, which is to date the most sensitive H2S sensor based on OSC films.

Figure1a depicts the molecular structure of polymerP1. This was dissolved in toluene to form a 2 mg mL−1solution.15Films dip-coated with four speeds of 2, 5, 10 and 30 mm min−1were deposited onto the OTS-modified SiO2/Si wafers. Atomic force microscopy (AFM) measurements showed that the four films coated from increasing speeds were around 25, 20, 15 and 5 nm thick, respectively. Gold was then evaporated as source/drain electrodes. Figure1b shows the device structure. All measurements were conducted in ambient air. The four films exhibited mobility andIon/Ioffratios in the order of 10−3cm2V−1s−1and 104–105, respectively, which are relatively low and probably due to the disorder of these polymer films as shown in Figure S1 in the Supporting Information. Film crystallinity showed nearly no change with increasing dipping speed as further verified by the UV/Vis absorption spectra of the four films (Figure S1

a) Molecular structure of polymerP1. b) Schematic illustration of sensor structure. OFETs are exposed to H2S gas and measured in two cases (VG=−30 V;VSD=−30 V); the OFETs are switched on: c) at the same time as H2S gas exposure (case α), and d) after H2S gas exposure (case β). Polymer films are dip-coated onto the substrates at four speeds (2, 5, 10 and 30 mm min−1), resulting in films with thicknesses of about 25, 20, 15 and 5 nm, respectively.

The four films were then exposed to H2S gas and electrical characteristics were measured in two cases as shown in Figure1c and d. Transistors were switched on at the same time (case α) and after (case β) H2S gas exposure. Every film was measured in these two cases and the film recovered totally from the former exposure before the second case started. In case α, OFETs were started and at the same time exposed to H2S which indicated that the working devices were surrounded by H2S gas and enough H2S molecules could penetrate into the films. In case β, OFETs were turned on immediately after H2S exposure ended, implying that the working devices were surrounded by air, only residue H2S molecules were retained in the films which could also desorb away from the films. Since sensors can merely respond to the analyte molecules which penetrate into the films, the difference between the numbers of analyte molecules in the two cases are of great interest for sensitivity, and also help to investigate the sensing process by incorporating varied film thickness (25, 20, 15, and 5 nm) of active layer in OFETs. The transfer curve took about 20 s for one running test at a given voltage (VG=−30 V,VSD=−30 V). Hence 5 and 15 s H2S exposure were selected and compared. H2S gas flowed about 0.5 cm above the device surface through a gas tube at a rate of 50 L h−1which was controlled by a gas mass-flow meter and glass rotary flow meter. The concentration of H2S was maintained at 1 ppm using N2as the carrier gas, if not otherwise mentioned. The whole setup was placed in a fume hood for safety considerations.

Figure S3 in the Supporting Information shows the typical transfer curves of four film thicknesses with and without H2S exposure. Table S1 in the Supporting Information summarizes the mobilities, threshold voltages andIon/Ioffratios of transistors on the basis of four film thicknesses. Changing drain current (ΔISD) can be used to study the sensitivity of these devices toward H2S gas.3dThe sensors showed no response to pure N2and were stable in the air (Figure S4 in the Supporting Information). All the transistors showed obviously decreased drain current when exposed to 1 ppm H2S gas. ΔISD,αand ΔISD,βrepresent theISDdecrease in case α and case β, denoted as 100 %×(ISD,0−ISD,H2S)/ISD,0(measured atVG=−30 V,VSD=−30 V). All the involved ΔISD(ΔISD,αand ΔISD,β) values were calculated and are summarized in Figure2and Tables S2 and S3 in the Supporting Information. When we exposed the devices to H2S for 5 s, we found that ΔISD,βwas smaller than ΔISD,αfor all four film thicknesses, and both ΔISD,αand ΔISD,βfor the four thicknesses rose first and then fell with thinner films (Figure2a). As a result, the ΔISDfollowed the following trend: the 20 nm film exhibited the highest ΔISD, the 15 nm film showed an intermediate ΔISD, and 5 and 25 nm films gave the lowest ΔISDin cases α and β. A longer exposure time of 15 s (Figure2b) produced larger ΔISDwhich also rose first and then fell. This trend agreed with that of the 5 s exposure for both cases, that is, the highest ΔISDfor the 20 nm film, the intermediate ΔISDfor the 15 nm film and the lowest ΔISDfor the 5 and 25 nm films. The 20 nm film always gave the largest response among the four film thicknesses in both cases under different exposure times. The most remarkable ΔISD(5 s: ΔISD,α=71–83 % and ΔISD,β=55–66 %; 15 s: ΔISD,α=86–92 % and ΔISD,β=71–75 %) occurred under only 1 ppm H2S in such a short time. Hence, a highly sensitive and fast-responsive sensor based on polymerP1is demonstrated.2

The sensitivities of four film thicknesses are summarized when the devices were exposed to H2S for: a) 5 s, and b) 15 s (VG=−30 V;VSD=−30 V). ΔISD,α(black) represents the current change measured in case α; ΔISD,β(blue) represents the current change measured in case β; Δ(ΔISD) (red)=ΔISD,α−ΔISD,βrepresents the ΔISDdifference in two cases. H2S concentration is 1 ppm mixing with N2.

The sensitivities in the four films with different thicknesses do not monotonically increase with decreased film thickness, which differs from the reports in the literature.3c,8a,8bTo clarify this interesting phenomenon, the change of sensitivity for each film thickness in the two cases was compared and the value Δ(ΔISD) was calculated according to the equation, Δ(ΔISD)=ΔISD,α−ΔISD,β. For all films, Δ(ΔISD) is a positive value because ΔISD,αis always larger than ΔISD,βas indicated in Figure2and Tables S2 and S3. With 5 s H2S exposure (Figure2a), the ΔISD,αand ΔISD,βvalues of the 25 nm film are similar and the resulting Δ(ΔISD) is the smallest. As the film becomes thinner, the Δ(ΔISD) increases first and then decreases. The 20 nm film has the second largest Δ(ΔISD), the 15 nm film generates the largest Δ(ΔISD) and the 5 nm film has a smaller Δ(ΔISD). This tendency is different from the trend of ΔISDfor which the highest value emerges with the 20 nm film and the second largest ΔISDwith the 15 nm film for both ΔISD,αand ΔISD,β. With 15 s H2S exposure, Δ(ΔISD) exhibits the same trend, that is, the largest Δ(ΔISD) with the 15 nm film, the second largest Δ(ΔISD) with the 20 nm film, the smallest Δ(ΔISD) with the 5 and 25 nm films, which further verify the experimental results. In addition, the ΔISD,αvalues for the 25 and 5 nm films are similar while the ΔISD,βfor the 25 nm film is obviously larger than that of 5 nm film at both 5 and 15 s exposure. These interesting results between the two cases as well as among the four thicknesses are quite informative for the study of the sensing process, and are instructively important for improving the sensing response.

The experimental results above pave the way for investigating the sensing process. The measurements of two cases take place in the same sensor with the same film, operating voltage and H2S concentration, and furthermore, a complete recovery between two measurements ensures the reproducibility. The only difference between ΔISD,αand ΔISD,βis the number of H2S molecules retained in the films, as the H2S is removed in case β, which generates Δ(ΔISD). Both ΔISDand Δ(ΔISD) change with the film thickness. As the films become thinner, factors such as barriers of the film, morphologies of the film and interaction between analytes and conducting channel can change the ability of films to retain H2S molecules. For convenience, we attribute this ability to two main processes: absorption and desorption. The former can keep the analytes in the films while the latter can make analytes desorb away from the films. Thinning the active layer has negligible influence on film morphology as evidenced from AFM characterization and the overlapping UV/Vis absorption (Figures S1 and S2). Absorption enhances in the thinner active layer due to the electronic effect of having more gas molecules near the channel, nevertheless, barriers of film become smaller and favor also desorption.3c,8fTherefore, both absorption and desorption speeds increase with decreased film thickness. When the film thickness decreases from 25 to 20 nm, the higher ΔISD,αand ΔISD,βindicate that the absorption speed of analytes increases resulting in more retained analytes in the active layer. ΔISD,αand ΔISD,βstart to decrease with 15 nm film and further lower at 5 nm film, indicating rising analyte desorption speed and less analyte residue in the active layers along with decreased film thickness. However, the smaller ΔISDbut larger Δ(ΔISD) with 15 nm film, compared with 20 nm film, implies that desorption speed increases faster than absorption speed as the active layer becomes thinner. The similar ΔISD,αvalues for 25 and 5 nm films but obviously larger ΔISD,βwith 25 nm film than with 5 nm film further confirms this rule. When we extended the exposure time to 15 s (three times longer than 5 s), ΔISD(ΔISD,αand ΔISD,β) and Δ(ΔISD) did not proportionally increase. Therefore, we believe that exposure time is not the determining factor in this sensing process. The fast desorption in the thin active layer reveals weak chemical interaction between H2S molecules and polymerP1.

Figure3presents the schematic diagram of the sensing process deduced from the above experiments, and shows the change of both absorption and desorption speed with different film thicknesses. With decreasing film thickness, both absorption and desorption speeds increase, but desorption speed rises faster than absorption speed. Due to the combined effect of absorption and desorption, the number of H2S residues in the active layer increases first, maximizes with the 20 nm film and then decreases with a smaller film thickness. This is consistent with the trend of ΔISD(ΔISD,αand ΔISD,β) but different from the trend of Δ(ΔISD) which reaches the maximum with the3

The sensing process. Both absorption and desorption speeds of H2S molecules increase when the polymer film becomes thinner. But desorption speed (νd,n;n=25, 20, 15, and 5 nm) increases much faster than absorption speed (νa,n). The length of arrows denotes the level of the speed.

Selectivity is one of the key performance parameters for practical sensor applications. Figure4presents the ΔISD,αfor polymerP1-based OFETs exposed to different gas analytes including NH3, ethanol, hexane, isopropanol, CH2Cl2, H2O, toluene, acetone and HCHO.16Pure N2was used as the carrier gas for all the solvent analytes (Figure S5 in the Supporting Information). O and S atoms belong to the same group with similar properties in the periodic table. Hence H2O was detected but with much lower sensitivity than H2S. Considering the larger dipole moment of H2O (1.84 D) than H2S (0.97 D), it can be speculated that dipole–channel interaction does not mainly induce the ΔISD,α. Further evidence are the measurements for ethanol (1.69 D), acetone (2.69 D) and isopropanol (1.66 D).3cHCHO is a predominantly toxic gas occurring in newly decorated houses and NH3is also one of the most harmful gases in air, so detection of these two gases is quite meaningful. Response to NH3and HCHO is more sensitive than with the other seven solvent analytes, but still much less sensitive than H2S. Electron pairs of H2S molecules could trap the positively charged carriers in the p-type OSC film.12aTherefore, the charge-trapping effect of H2S should be the main reason for the decreased drain current, which needs further investigation. Among the tested ten analytes (Table S4 in the Supporting Information), sensors based on polymerP1show superior selectivity to H2S gas as clearly displayed in Figure4.4

Selectivity investigation. Selectivity and sensitivity were tested by exposing the sensors to different gas analytes for 30 s. The concentrations were 1 ppm for H2S, 50 ppm for NH3, 470 ppm for HCHO and more than 10 000 ppm for other solvent analytes. The sensors used the 20 nm film and measurements were made according to case α.

We also conducted experiments to detect even lower H2S concentrations. H2S at 1 ppb was prepared by mixing 1 s flow of 250 ppm H2S (mixed with N2) at a rate of 0.22 L h−1and 1000 s flow of pure N2at a rate of 50 L h−1. The gas mixture was collected in a plastic bag. The device showed no response to the plastic bag filled with pure N2. The 20 nm film was used to fabricate the sensors. As shown in Figure5a, the device still showed clear response with ΔISD,αvalue of 35 % when exposed to 1 ppb H2S for only 15 s. Recovery time was 5–6 min which was nearly the same for sensors exposed to higher H2S concentrations of 1 ppm and sensors based on the other three films (Tables S2 and S3). The interaction between H2S andP1is weak, as speculated from the fast desorption in thin polymer film, which should correspond to a short recovery time. Compared with the fast response in 5 s exposure experiment, the long recovery time for 1 ppb H2S should be attributed to the high sensitivity of the devices which had been reported before.4aIn addition, a high concentration was tested, as shown in Figure S6 in the Supporting Information. The ΔISD,αwas nearly 100 % when the device was exposed to 25 ppm H2S for only 5 s. Therefore, sensors based on polymerP1are more suitable for low H2S concentrations.5

Investigation of 1 ppb H2S and reusability studies (VG=−30 V;VSD=−30 V). a) Sensing response toward 1 ppb H2S. b) Reusability test of sensor. The measurement was continuously repeated five times. Every complete measurement contains fourISDcurves: exposure to 1 ppm H2S for 5 s (green), recovery for 1 (black), 2 (blue) and 6 min (red). The device recovers totally when H2S gas stops flowing for 6 min. For both graphs the sensors used the 20 nm films and measurements were made according to case α.

Figure5b displays the reusability of the sensors based on polymerP1. Measurements were repeated five times and every complete measurement included fourISDcurves: exposure to 1 ppm H2S for 5 s, recovery for 1, 2 and 6 min, respectively. The device recovered completely after H2S gas stopped flowing for 6 min. The well-overlapped transfer curves demonstrated that sensors based on polymerP1exhibited good operational stability. The sensors even showed good reusability for analytes that were detected with much lower sensitivity such as acetone, ethanol, toluene, and isopropanol (Figure S7 in the Supporting Information). Selectivity, low concentration and reusability investigations were all based on the 20 nm film. A much thicker active layer (about 55 nm) obtained by spin-coating was also exposed to 1 ppm H2S but a quite small response was obtained (Figure S8 in the Supporting Information).

In summary, we have demonstrated a high performance H2S sensor based on semiconducting polymerP1in OFET geometry. The ability of the film to retain analytes is an important factor for sensor performance, which relates to the thickness of active layers. By thinning the active layer, both absorption and desorption speed of the analytes increase but the desorption speed rises faster than the absorption speed. Thus an optimized film thickness (ca. 20 nm) is required to retain enough H2S in the active layer in order to reach the highest sensitivity. Sensors based on such a film exhibit high sensitivity, fast response, excellent selectivity, good operational stability and could detect H2S concentration as low as 1 ppb. This study provides a solution to ppb-level H2S detection in ambient air by using low-cost and portable electronic sensors.

This work was funded by the Germany–China Joint Project TRR61 (DFG–NSFC Transregio Project), the National Basic Research Program, China (2009CB939701), the Collaborative Innovation Center of Suzhou Nano Science and Technology and SUN-WIN Collaborative Projects (2013) financially supported by Suzhou Industrial Park.

As a service to our authors and readers, this journal provides supporting information supplied by the authors. Such materials are peer reviewed and may be re-organized for online delivery, but are not copy-edited or typeset. Technical support issues arising from supporting information (other than missing files) should be addressed to the authors.

Please note: The publisher is not responsible for the content or functionality of any supporting information supplied by the authors. Any queries (other than missing content) should be directed to the corresponding author for the article.

Volume22,Issue11

Special Issue:Women in Chemistry

March 7, 2016

Pages3654-3659

Copyright © 1999-2025John Wiley & Sons, Incor related companies. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence technologies or similar technologies.

Your password has been changed

Enter your email address below.

Please check your email for instructions on resetting your password.
                    If you do not receive an email within 10 minutes, your email address may not be registered,
                    and you may need to create a new Wiley Online Library account.

Can't sign in? Forgot your username?

Enter your email address below and we will send you your username

If the address matches an existing account you will receive an email with instructions to retrieve your username