Phthalocyanine-functionalized field-eﬀect transistor biosensor for in situ monitoring of cell-released hydrogen sulfide
Author links open overlay panel
Ling Xiao a
, 
Shanshan Yu a
, 
Qing Cui a
, 
Jiacheng Liu a
, 
Guowu Liang a
, 
Yutao Li a b
, 
Guo-Jun Zhang a b

Show more

Add to Mendeley

Share

Cite
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.snb.2024.135402
Get rights and content
Highlights
•
The CoGPCs/G-FET sensor is established for in situ monitoring of H2S released from cells.
•
The sensor exhibits ultra-high sensitivity with the detection limit down to 10 pM.
•
The effect of inhibitors on H2S release from colon cancer cells is investigated.
•
This work helps us understand the role of H2S in biological and pathological processes.
Abstract
Hydrogen sulfide (H2S) is an important endogenous gas transmitter that is closely associated with human pathological and physiological states. Therefore, the accurate and quantitative detection of H2S has attracted great research interest in the biomedical field. In this paper, we report a phthalocyanine-functionalized field-eﬀect transistor (FET) biosensor for ultra-sensitive, in situ, real-time monitoring of H2S released from cells. The reduced graphene oxide (RGO) and cobalt phthalocyanine RGO nanocomposites (CoGPCs) were layer to layer assembled on a prefabricated FET device surface. The excellent electrical conductivity of graphene and the high catalytic property and specificity of metal phthalocyanines ensure sensitive and specific detection of H2S. The biosensor was capable of detecting H2S in the range of 10 pM to 1 mM with detection limit down to 10 pM. In addition, the sensor exhibited good selectivity and biocompatibility. The excellent performance allowed the sensor to in situ and real-time monitor H2S release from different cell lines, and investigate the effect of inhibitors on H2S release from colon cancer cells. This FET biosensor provides a new approach for in situ and real-time monitoring of H2S release, which may help us understand the function of H2S in biological and pathological processes and contribute to drug screening development studies.
Previous article in issue
Next article in issue
Keywords
H2SField effect transistor (FET)Metal phthalocyanineReal-time monitoring
1. Introduction
Hydrogen sulphide (H2S) is the third endogenous gas transmitter, in addition to NO and CO, and is considered to be an important gas signaling molecule [1], [2]. The endogenous levels of H2S in cells are tightly controlled. When H2S accumulates in large amounts in the cellular environment, it can be extremely harmful to the organism and may be associated with many persistent diseases such as Alzheimer's disease [3], Down's syndrome [4], fatal kidney disease[5], diabetes [6] and even cancer [7]. For example, some studies have shown that H2S is present in high levels in colon cancer and plays an important role in stimulating bioenergetics, cell proliferation and angiogenesis, promoting the development and growth of colon cancer [8], [9]. Since H2S is closely associated with a large number of physiological processes and the inhibition of H2S-producing enzymes has been reported as a potentially effective anti-tumor strategy, the development of rapid, sensitive and convenient methods for in situ monitoring of H2S release from cells is of great interest for understanding disease development and drug development screening.
Traditionally, H2S release from cells has been measured by collecting culture supernatants or by lysing cell homogenates and measuring them spectrophotometrically by methylene blue method [10], [11]. However, this method lacks sensitivity, and cannot monitor the change of H2S concentration dynamically in real time. Currently, considerable efforts have been made to accurately and precisely measure changes of H2S concentrations in cell level[12], [13], [14]. For example, Quan et al. designed and synthesized a fluorescent probe DB2T based on the BODIPY structure for the 'on' fluorescence detection of H2S and explored its photosensitive anticancer ability [15]. The detection limit of probe DB2T towards H2S was 6.39 nM, and the method was successfully applied to detect the exogenous H2S in zebrafish and to obtain fluorescence imaging of endogenous H2S in colon cancer cell line and tumor tissue. Although this method allows imaging of sulphide in living cells, it still cannot allow real-time monitoring of H2S fluctuations. Electrochemistry is often used for real-time monitoring of H2S due to its simplicity, rapidity, ease of operation and affordability [16], [17]. Hu et al. prepared a PEDOT-modified nanoporous gold microelectrode capable of real-time monitoring H2S release from Hela cell, and the detection limit was calculated to be about 0.1 μM (S/N = 3) [18]; Xu et al. proposed a highly efficient multi-channel microfluidic electrochemical sensor integrated with nanocarbon microelectrode capable of real-time monitoring H2S release from colon cancer cells, and the limit of detection was 75 nM (S/N = 3) [19]. However, the detection limits of the sensors still need to be improved considering the extremely small amount of H2S released from the cells and the short half-life of H2S, which is extremely easy to decompose.
Recently, field-effect transistor (FET) biosensors have been increasingly used in the field of bioanalysis and biomedical by utilization of the characteristics of label-free detection, real-time readout, low noise, high sensitivity, small size and easy integration [20], [21], [22], [23], [24], [25]. In addition, it operates at a relatively low detection potential with minimal impact on the cell. Therefore, the use of FET biosensors for in situ real-time monitoring of living cells has intrinsic advantages. Currently, FET biosensors have been successfully used for the detection of cellular release of biomolecules such as dopamine [26], glutamate [27], H2O2 [28] and NO [29], et al. In addition, various biomimetic molecular catalysts (e.g. metalloporphyrin and metallophthalocyanine) with significant catalytic properties have been reported to the relevant detection of various molecules [30], [31], [32]. For example, Wu et al. proposed a general strategy for the large-scale synthesis of nanowires modified with biomimetic molecular catalysts to construct functionalized electrochemical nanosensors [33]. For the first time, the proposed nanosensor enabled real-time electrochemical monitoring of glutathione levels and their redox homeostasis in a single living cell. In addition, by using the P-Fe bond between iron porphyrin and phosphate, Zhang et al. synthesized a black phosphorus sandwich structure with a self-assembled iron porphyrin monolayer sandwiched on both sides to prepare an I-Phene with high sensitivity to NO and they successfully used it for real-time monitoring of NO released from cells [34]. In our previous work, FET biosensors assembled with RGO and iron porphyrin have been reported for ultrasensitive and efficient detection of nitric oxide (NO) at the single-cell level [29]. So it is believed that the combination of bionic small molecule catalysts with FET platform is expected to improve the sensitivity of H2S detection.
In this study, we prepared cobalt phthalocyanine modified graphene nanocomposites (CoGPCs) using the strong π-π stacking interaction between RGO and cobalt phthalocyanine (Copc), and then deposited them on the channel surface of the pre-prepared graphene field effect transistors (G-FET), thus constructing a RGO@Copc structure at the interface. The excellent conductivity of graphene and the high catalysis and specificity of metal phthalocyanine ensure sensitive and specific detection of H2S. The sensor has been successfully applied to monitor H2S release from cancer and normal cells in real time (as shown in Fig. 1). In addition, H2S release from colon cancer cells in the presence of different inhibitors has been studied, and the inhibitory effects of cystathionine β-synthase (CBS) inhibitors and cystathionine γ-lyase (CSE) inhibitors were compared with an attempt to provide strong evidence for CBS as a new drug target. This work may contribute to the understanding the role of H2S in physiological and pathological processes and aid in drug screening development studies.
Fig. 1
Download: Download high-res image (203KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 1. Schematic diagram of the CoGPCs/G-FET biosensor for in situ and real-time monitoring of H2S release from cells. In the presence of a CGL stimulator, the cell releases H2S, and the nanocomposite CoGPCs interact with H2S to generate electrons, which are doped into the channel, resulting in n-type doping and thus a drop in real-time current.

2. Experimental section
2.1. Materials and chemicals
Graphene oxide (GO) powder (99.99995%) was purchased from Alfa Aesar Co. Ltd. (Tianjin, China). Hydrazine (98%), sodium hydroxide (NaOH), sodium chloride (NaCl), potassium chloride (KCl), magnesium chloride (MgCl2), glucose and phosphate buffered saline (PBS) were purchased from Generay Biotech Co. Ltd. (Shanghai, China). Shanghai Macklin Biochemical Co. Ltd. (Shanghai, China) provided cobalt phthalocyanine (Copc). The cell culture medium DMEM was purchased from Procell Life Science&Technology Co. Ltd. (Wuhan, China). Cell Counting Kit-8 (CCK-8) was purchased from Meilun Biotechnology Co. Ltd. (Dalian, China). Various human cell lines (e.g., Human normal breast epithelial cells MCF-10A, Human breast cancer cells MCF-7, and Human colon cancer cells SW480 were purchasedfrom American Type Culture Collection (ATCC, Manassas, VA, USA). The inhibitor aminooxyacetic acid (AOAA) was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO, USA) and DL-Propargylglycine (PAG) from Macklin Biochemical Co. Ltd. (Shanghai, China). Ultrapure water was obtained from a Millipore water purification system (18.2 MΩ.cm resistivity, Milli-Q Direct 8). The microplate reader was purchased from BioTek Instruments, Inc. (Vermont, USA). All of the chemicals used in this study were of analytical grade. All other chemicals unless specified were reagent grade and were used without further purification.
2.2. Synthesis of CoGPCs nanocomposites
CoGPCs nanocomposites were prepared as previously reported [29]. The nanocomposites of RGO with cobalt phthalocyanine were synthesized by the following steps. Firstly, 3 mg of GO flake solid was dissolved in 3 mL of pure water and sonicated for 5 min at room temperature to obtain a clarified brown liquid. Then 5 mg of cobalt phthalocyanine powder was weighed and dispersed in 1 mL of DMF/water (4:1, v:v), sonicated for 5 min to obtain a suspension and then dropped into the GO solution and sonicated for 60 min. During the sonication process, GO and Copc were tightly bound together through strong π-π interaction and hydrophobic interaction. Then the GO-Copc complex was obtained by centrifugation (12,000 g, 45 min) and re-dispersed into 6 mL of pure water. Subsequently, 10 μL of hydrazine hydrate and 50 μL of ammonia were added to the above solution to prepare RGO-Copc nanocomposites and the mixture was heated in an oil bath with stirring at 100 °C for 70 min. The resulting dispersion was filtered through a nylon membrane (0.22 µm) and washed thoroughly with ultrapure water. The resulting nanocomposites were ultrasonically dispersed in DMF to obtain CoGPCs solution.
2.3. Fabrication of CoGPCs/G-FET biosensors
The FET chip was fabricated by standard semiconductor technology as mentioned in our previous reports [35]. Similarly, the G-FET devices were prepared according to the method reported in our previous works [36], [37]. To obtain the CoGPCs/G-FET device, the CoGPCs nanocomposites suspension was further drop-casted on the G-FET biosensors and annealed at 80 ℃ for 1.5 h to ensure that nanocomposites was successfully functionalized. Then the chip was rinsed with deionized water and dried with nitrogen for subsequent experiments.
2.4. Detection of H2S
The response performance of the sensor to H2S is usually evaluated in aqueous solutions using Na2S or NaHS as a fast-release H2S donor [38], [39], [40], [41]. Upon dissolution, either salt rapidly speciates into H2S. For transfer curve measurement, to test the response of CoGPCs/G-FET sensors to H2S, different concentrations of Na2S solutions were prepared and sequentially exposed to the channel of the chip. Meanwhile, the silver wire gate was inserted into the solution above the channel, and the electrical signal was then recorded. After each measurement, the chip was rinsed to wash the previous solution off, and then dried with nitrogen for the next measurement.
In the real-time measurement, in order to examine the real-time current response of the sensor to different concentrations of H2S, the pure buffer (1 ×PBS) without H2S was first added to the chip channel as an initial baseline for the current change, and after the baseline was smooth, we then sequentially added different concentrations of Na2S solutions consecutively for dynamic testing. A semiconductor analyzer was utilized to record the I-t curves of the sensor exposed to different concentrations of H2S in real time. In this process, there is no cleaning and drying step.
2.5. Cell culture and CCK-8 experiment
Different human cancer cell lines (e.g., Human breast cancer cells MCF-7, and Human colon cancer cells (SW480) were cultured in fresh Dulbecco’s modified essential medium (DMEM, Cellgro) containing 10% fetal bovine serum, 1% penicillin (100 U/mL), and streptomycin (100 μg/ mL). The human mammary epithelial cell line MCF-10A was used as a representative of the normal cell. MCF-10A was cultured in MCF-10A cell special medium. All cells were kept in a humidified atmosphere with 5% CO2 at 37 °C.
In order to investigate the biocompatibility of the device, the CCK-8 method was used to conduct toxicity tests on different sensor chips. In short, the G-FET device and CoGPCs/G-FET device were cut into suitable sizes and cultured separately with SW-480 cells. After 24 h of incubation, CCK-8 reagents were added, and the supernatant was measured by a microplate reader.
2.6. Real time monitoring of H2S release from cell
For real-time measurement of H2S, a self-made reservoir was mountained on the sensing channel as previously reported in the literature [27], and then the chip was sterilized for 30 min with UV light in a biosafety cabinet. Cells were digested by trypsin and seeded in the reservoir at a density of approximately 106 cells/cm2. After 12 h of incubation, the cell culture medium was aspirated and washed three times with PBS solution followed by addition of appropriate amount of PBS, and the device was re-incubated in the incubator for 30 min to restore the cell status. To measure the release of H2S from the cells, the cells were stimulated with cystathione-γ-lyase (CGL). In control experiments, cells were incubated with DL-Propargylglycine (PAG) or aminooxyacetic acid (AOAA) for 30 min prior to stimulation with CGL.
3. Results and discussion
3.1. Preparation and characterization of CoGPCs nanocomposites
Fig. 2a shows the UV-Vis absorption spectra of the GO, Copc and CoGPCs, respectively. The UV-Vis absorption spectra of the CoPc and CoGPCs exhibited a strong Q-band (S0-S1 jump) and a broad soret (B-) band. The Q-band of CoGPCs was red shifted by 5 nm compared to that of CoPC, which is generally consistent with those previously reported in the literature [42]. This redshift of the Q-band of CoGPCs is due to a reduction in the band gap between the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) and the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) [43]. The changes in the UV-Vis spectra confirm the successful preparation of CoGPCs.
Fig. 2
Download: Download high-res image (260KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 2. Relevant characterization of nanocomposite CoGPCs. (a) UV-Vis spectrograms of GO solution, Copc solution, and CoGPCs solution, respectively. (b) Cyclic voltammograms of bare glassy carbon electrode, glassy carbon electrode modified with RGO, Copc, CoGPCs, respectively, in 2.0 mM K3/K4 [Fe(CN)6] solution containing 0.10 M KCl. (c) Fourier infrared spectra of GO, Copc, CoGPCs, respectively.

To further demonstrate the successful preparation of the nanocomposites, the electrochemistry method was used to characterize the products prepared in each step. Firstly, the different materials modified glassy carbon electrodes (GCE) were prepared by applying the same concentration of Copc, RGO and CoGPCs solutions on the surface of the glassy carbon electrodes and dried at room temperature overnight, while the unmodified GCEs were used as controls. Then, cyclic voltammetry (CV) was carried out and [FeCN6]−3/−4 was chosen as the electroactive redox probe. Fig. 2b shows CV plots for bare GCE, GCE-CoPc, GCE-RGO and GCE-CoGPCs in 2.0 mM K3/K4 [Fe(CN)6] containing 0.10 M KCl. As seen, the unmodified glassy carbon electrode had a redox peak, which is caused by the inherent electrochemical properties of the electrode. GCE-Copc exhibited a lower redox peak potential due to the low conductivity and poor electrochemical activity of Copc. In contrast, GCE-RGO showed a significant response, which is caused by the excellent electrochemical properties of GO. GCE-CoGPCs indicated a greater current response than GCE-Copc and GCE. The addition of GO may enhance the conductivity of the electrode and promote electron transfer, which is also generally consistent with what has been reported in the literature [43]. In addition to this, we used Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy for further characterization. As shown in Fig. 2c, the CoGPCs showed broadband absorption at ∼3361 nm, caused by the vibrations of the -OH group of GO, which roughly overlaps with the vibrational position of the -OH group in GO alone at ∼3357 nm. The C-C stretching and deformation vibrations in Copc (∼ 1327 cm−1) also occurred at ∼1323 cm−1 in the nanocomposites, which roughly coincides with the benzene ring backbone Cdouble bondC vibrations in GO (∼1650 cm−1 and ∼1387 cm−1) [44]. All of the above methods suggest that the preparation of CoGPCs nanocomposites is successful.
3.2. Characterization of CoGPCs/G-FET biosensor
To demonstrate the successful modification of CoGPCs nanocomposites on the chip, the scanning electron microscope (SEM) was used for observing the surface morphology of the nanocomposites. As shown in Fig. 3a, the folded structure of RGO was clearly seen. This is due to the fact that the RGO lamellae are tightly bound together during the complexation process so that they can bind with more Copc. However, since we cannot clearly see the presence of Copc in the SEM, we further used elemental mapping to characterize the Co elements. The elemental mapping profiles in the inset show that elemental Co was uniformly distributed on the films, indicating good dispersion of Copc on the surface. In addition, the X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) data in the channel region of G-FET and CoGPCs/G-FET devices were compared. As shown in Fig. 3b, broad energy XPS spectra were obtained for the CoGPCs/G-FET (blue line) and G-FET (green line) respectively. In the CoGPCs/G-FET device, C1s and O1s peaks were clearly visible, which is attributed to the abundance of elements in both CoGPCs and GO. Due to the abundance of N elements in CoPC, an increase in N elements in the composite could be seen. To better distinguish the CoGPCs/G-FET from G-FET devices, narrow energy XPS spectra of the Co2p peak were analyzed and magnified in the inset. A significant Co2p peak was observed in the CoGPCs/G-FET device, while the peak did not appear in the G-FET device. The results further show that the CoGPCs nanocomposites have been successfully modified on the chip as expected.
Fig. 3
Download: Download high-res image (351KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 3. Relevant characterization and electrical characterization of CoGPCs/G-FET biosensors. (a) SEM images of the CoGPCs/G-FET sensor. (b) Wide energy XPS spectra of the channel region of the G-FET (black line) and CoGPCs/G-FET (red line) devices, inset: narrow energy XPS spectra of the corresponding Co2p peaks in the CoGPCs/G-FET (red line) and G-FET (black line). (c) The transfer characterization curves of Ids-Vg before and after modification of CoGPCs nanocomposites on G-FET biosensor. (d) The output characterization curves of Ids-Vds of CoGPCs/G-FET biosensor at different gate pressures. (e) Ids-Vg transfer characteristic curve of CoGPCs/G-FET biosensor in PBS with repeated measurement times. (f) Dirac point values in the 5 th, 10 th, 15 th, and 20 th cycles of the Ids-Vg curve of the sensor in PBS.

To further confirm that CoGPCs were successfully assembled on G-FET biosensors, the transfer characteristic curves of G-FET and CoGPCs/G-FET biosensors were compared, respectively. Fig. 3c shows the transfer characteristic curves of G-FET (black line) and CoGPCs/G-FET (red line), in which the Ids-Vg curves of both sensors showed obvious bipolar characteristics, and the Dirac point (VCNP) shifted significantly to the left when CoGPCs nanocomposites were assembled onto the G-FET sensing region. As known, the G-FET biosensor is p-type doped. Nevertheless, since the Copc in the nanocomposites is an electron-rich macroscopic conjugated system [45], it will contribute electrons to cause n-doping effects, thus making the Dirac point left-shifted [29]. To further investigate the electrical properties of the CoGPCS/G-FET biosensor, the Ids-Vds output characteristic curves of the CoGPCs/G-FET biosensor were obtained and the results are shown in Fig. 3d. When the gate voltage was increased from − 0.3 V to 0.3 V, the drain current gradually decreased, indicating that the CoGPCs/G-FET biosensor was p-type doped.
3.3. Stability, biocompatibility, reversibility
Stability is an important aspect of sensor performance, so the stability of the device for repeated measurements was further investigated, and Fig. 3e shows the Ids-Vg curves of the sensor for 20 repetitions in PBS. The changes of the Dirac point in the 5 th, 10 th, 15 th, and 20 th cycles were compared, and the results are shown in Fig. 3f. It is seen that the shift of VCNP was insignificant (ΔVCNP< 8 mV) with the increase of the number of scans, implying that the developed FET device has a good stability. Apart from this, we also examined the long-term stability of the device. The CoGPCs/G-FET sensor was stored in a vacuum drying oven for 1 d, 3 d, 5 d and 7 d, and the transfer characteristic curves were further measured. As shown in Fig. S1a and S1b, the Dirac point voltage changed slightly after 5 d and 7 d, and still remained above 91% and 85% of its original value, respectively, indicating that the CoGPCs/G-FET biosensor has good stability. The slight change in signal may be due to non-specific surface adsorption.
Biocompatibility is an important condition that needs to be examined for in situ cell culture. Therefore CCK-8 experiments were carried out to demonstrate the viability of the cells on the sensor. The experimental results are shown in Fig. S2. The normalized survival rates for both the G-FET biosensor and the CoGPCs/G-FET biosensor were all about 90%, indicating that the CoGPCs/G-FET biosensor has good biocompatibility. Moreover, the cells were always in physiological PBS solution during the measurement, and the entire measurement process could be completed in less than 15 min, and it has been documented that the cells could remain relatively viable for 3 h in vitro [46]. All of the above measurements ensured good cell viability on the chip. Thus far, the sensor's sensitive response to Na2S and its good selectivity, stability and biocompatibility have laid the foundation for the following in situ detection of H2S release from cells.
Then the reversibility performance of the sensor was investigated. We performed three cycles of measurements on the same FET sensors for repeated adding the 10 nM and 1 μM Na2S, respectively, and analyzed the changes in the Dirac point voltage to make a quantitative analysis of the reversibility of the devices. Fig. S4b demonstrates the percentage response of the three sets of sensors in the reversibility experiments, and the results showed that the change of voltage value at the Dirac point was stable and less fluctuating, and the responses were all maintained above 80%. The above experiments demonstrate that the sensors constructed in this way have good detection reversibility. The main reason for the reversible detection of hydrogen sulfide by the proposed FET sensor is that its detection principle is based on the catalytic effect of the complex on hydrogen sulfide, which is different from the binding of antibodies or aptamers to the target (binding is saturable). In the process of detecting H2S by this sensor, the CoGPCs layer catalyzes the oxidation of H2S, and the released electrons are captured by the channel sensing layer RGO, resulting in n-type doping, therefore, based on the detection principle of the sensor, our sensors require only a simple rinsing process, and do not require a complex recovery process for reversible detection.
3.4. Sensitivity and specificity of CoGPCs/G-FET biosensor
The sensitivity of the sensor was then assessed by measuring the transfer characteristic curves of the CoGPCs/G-FET sensor at different concentrations of Na2S solution. The transfer characteristic curves of the CoGPCs/G-FET sensor at different concentrations of Na2S solution are shown in Fig. 4a. Firstly, we took the curve of the CoGPCs/G-FET sensor in pure buffer without Na2S addition as the initial baseline. Upon Na2S addition, the Dirac point gradually shifted to the left. And the shift changed along with the increasement of the Na2S concentration. It is due to the fact that when H2S is added, the CoGPCs layer catalyzes the oxidation of H2S, and the released electrons are captured by the channel sensing layer RGO, resulting in n-type doping [47], [48]. Fig. 4b reveals that the change in leftward shift of the Dirac point shows a good linear relationship with the logarithm of H2S concentration. To further demonstrate that the response of the CoGPCs/G-FET sensor to H2S was derived from the nanocomposites, the transfer characteristic curves and real-time current responses of the RGO-modified FET sensor at different concentrations of Na2S solution were measured as control (Fig. S3). Both show that the G-FET had negligible response to H2S.
Fig. 4
Download: Download high-res image (329KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 4. The sensitivity and selectivity of the CoGPCs/G-FET sensor. (a) Transfer characteristic curves of CoGPCs/G-FET for Na2S solutions with concentrations ranging from 10 pM to 1 mM. (b) Linear relationship between the logarithm of the CoGPCs/G-FET sensor and the concentration of Na2S. Error bars indicate the standard deviation of the measurements (n = 3). (c) Transfer characteristic curves for the response of the CoGPCs/G-FET sensor to a range of substances (1 mM AA, UA, H2O2, H2PO4-, HCO3-, S2O82-, S2S32-, SO4-, NO2-, NO3-, K+, Na+, and Mg2+ and 100 pM, 100 μM Na2S). * *: p < 0.01, * ** : p < 0.001, * ** *: p < 0.0001 (Student's t-test). (d) Comparison of VCNP changes between Na2S and other interfering substances. Error bars indicate the standard deviation of the measurements (n = 3). (e) Real-time response of the CoGPCs/G-FET biosensor to currents of Na2S at concentrations ranging from 1 pM to 1 μM. The gate voltage Vgs= −0.15 V. (f) Linearity of the rate of change of the current versus the logarithm of the Na2S concentration. Error bars indicate the standard deviation of the measurements (n = 3).

Due to the unique interaction between cobalt phthalocyanine and H2S, the FET sensor has good immunity to a wide range of exogenous electroactive substances such as AA, UA, glucose and several inorganic anions and cations commonly found in biophysiological systems. From Fig. 4c, it is seen that the CoGPCs/G-FET sensor showed negligible response when 1 mM AA, UA, H2O2, H2PO4-, HCO3-, S2O82-, S2S32-, SO4-, NO2-, NO3-, K+, Na+, and Mg2+ solutions were applied to the sensor surface. Nevertheless, a significant Dirac point change appeared when Na2S at a concentration of 100 μM and sub-micromolar concentrations (100 pM) were used. In order to clearly compare the response of the sensor to high concentrations of interfering substances with low concentrations of Na2S, the changes of Dirac point produced by all the substances are plotted. As shown in Fig. 4d, the signal generated by 100 pM H2S was significantly higher than that generated by the interfering substance with a p-value < 0.01, but much lower than that generated by 100 μM H2S with a p-value < 0.0001. This proves that our sensors are able to distinguish lower H2S levels at sub-nanomolar concentrations from the signal of the interfering substance, demonstrating that the CoGPCs/G-FET biosensor responds specifically to H2S.
The excellent selectivity of the sensor can be explained by the properties of the material. As we know, metal phthalocyanines such as cobalt phthalocyanine have a wide range of applications in electrocatalysis due to their highly conjugated 18π electron system, which exhibits high stability and reversible redox chemistry [45], [49]. According to the literature, cobalt phthalocyanine has specific catalytic activity for molecules containing -SH groups [50], [51], [52]. This property can be explained by the orbital energy of the central metal cobalt that closely matches that of sulfur, enabling transfer of electron density from the sulfur orbital to the dz2 and dxz orbitals of the metal.
After obtaining the Id-Vg response and considering that the subsequent experiments require real-time monitoring of the cells, we proceeded to examine the real-time current response of the CoGPCs/G-FET sensor to different concentrations of H2S from 1 pM to 1 μM, and the results are shown in Fig. 4e. Firstly, 1 ×PBS without Na2S was added to the reaction bath as the initial baseline for the current change of the CoGPCs/G-FET biosensor. After the baseline was stabilized, the addition of 1 pM Na2S caused negligible change. When 10 pM Na2S was added, a significant decrease in current occurred. The current subsequently decreased with increasing Na2S solution, indicating that the detection limit of this biosensor is as low as 10 pM. Fig. 4f shows a good linear response between the absolute value of the current response (ǀ△I/I0ǀ) and the logarithmic value of the Na2S concentrations (lgCNa2S), clearly indicating that the current decreased with increasing concentration of Na2S. The sensing performance of different biosensors for H2S detection is compared and the comparison is illustrated in Table S1. Compared with other sensors for the determination of H2S, the CoGPCs/G-FET biosensor obtained the lowest detection limit. In the FET sensing mechanism, the direct coulomb interaction makes the detection more rapid, while the high precision of electricity makes the threshold of the smallest analyte sensed [53]. Both of them endow the FET sensors with a faster and more sensitive detection capability. Compared with MoSe2 FET, CoGPCs have a stronger catalytic ability for H2S, and the combination of Copc's high catalytic ability for H2S and RGO's good electrical conductivity ensures the sensitive detection of H2S [54], [55], which makes the CoGPCs/G-FET biosensor more sensitive for H2S detection than MoSe2 FET.
3.5. Real-time monitoring of cellular H2S under inhibitor intervention
Having been supported by the above results, then we inoculated the CoGPCs/G-FET biosensor with different types of human cell lines, namely human breast cancer cells (MCF-7), human colon cancer cell lines (SW-480) and human normal breast cells (MCF-10A), respectively. In the meantime, the cells were stimulated to secrete H2S with CGL, as shown in Fig. 5a. To illustrate the effect of different CGL dosages on H2S release, 5 μg mL−1, 10 μg mL−1 and 20 μg mL−1 CGL, respectively, were used as stimulants. As can be seen from Fig. S5b, the higher the CGL concentration, the more the H2S released from the cells. Considering that excessive stimulus concentrations can affect the state of the cells, 10 μg mL−1 CGL was finally chosen to perform the experiment. The effect of different cell densities on H2S release was also investigated. As shown in Fig. S5a, H2S was released from different densities of live cells and the current response increased with increasing cell densities. Fig. 5b shows the results of the released H2S amount of different cell types (MCF-7, MCF-10A and SW-480, respectively) after the addition of 10 μg mL−1 CGL. As shown in Fig. 5b, it can be seen that all the currents decreased. However, negligible signal in the control test was observed in the absence of cells. Notably, the amount of H2S released by different cell types differed. The amount of H2S released by SW-480 was much greater than that of MCF-10A and MCF-7, respectively. This result provides important information for identifying cancer cells and differentiating between different cell types by assessing extracellular H2S levels, which is important for the early clinical diagnosis of cancer disease.
Fig. 5
Download: Download high-res image (282KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 5. CoGPCs/G-FET biosensor monitors the release of H2S from different cells and real-time monitors the H2S release from SW-480 in the presence of the inhibitors AOAA and PAG. In these experiments, the gate voltage Vgs= −0.15 V. (a) Schematic diagram of the CoGPCs/G-FET biosensor detecting cellular release of H2S. (b) Real-time response of the CoGPCs/G-FET biosensor to H2S produced by different cells (MCF-7, MCF-10A, SW-480) under CGL stimulation, with the CGL-stimulated cell-free sensor serving as a control. Error bars indicate the standard deviation of the measurements (n = 3). (c) Schematic representation of CSE and CBS as key enzymes in the synthesis of H2S. (d) Current response of CoGPCs/G-FET biosensor to H2S release from SW-480 in the presence of different concentrations of AOAA and (e) PAG (0.1 mM and 1 mM). Uninhibited SW480 was used as a control group. (f) Bar graphs of the amount of H2S generated from SW-480 with the addition of 0.1 mM and 1 mM AOAA, PAG, and no inhibitor. * *: p < 0.01 (Student's t-test). Error bars indicate the standard deviation of the measurements (n = 3).

According to the literatures, cystathionine γ-lyase (CSE), cystathionine β-synthase (CBS) and 3-mercaptopyruvate sulphotransferase (3-MST) are currently considered to be the main enzymes for H2S production in mammals [56]. Usually, CBS is over-expressed in human colon adenocarcinoma [57]. As reported, AOAA is the inhibitor of CBS and PAG is the inhibitor of CSE [58]. CBS and CSE act on the same substrate while 3-MST is mainly found in mitochondria and acts on a different substrate from both. In order to compare the effects of CBS and CSE on the inhibition of H2S, the release of H2S from SW-480 in the presence of AOAA and PAG was investigated in real time using the CoGPCs/G-FET biosensor. Fig. 5c shows the classical role of CBS and CSE in sulphur metabolism in cells. Figs. 5d and 5e show the release of H2S from SW-480 in the presence of different concentrations of AOAA, PAG, and in the absence of inhibitors. It can be seen from the graphs that the addition of both inhibitors resulted in a significant reduction in H2S release. Moreover, the reduction of H2S release corresponded to increasing inhibitor concentrations, indicating a strong inhibitory effect. Subsequently, the electrical signals were brought into the standard curve for the correlation conversion of H2S concentration, and the results are shown in Fig. 5f, which displays the amount of H2S generated from SW-480 cell with and without inhibitor intervention at different concentrations of AOAA and PAG. Through the significance analysis, we can see that the inhibitory effect of the same concentration of AOAA on the production of H2S by SW480 is stronger than that of PAG, and there is a significant difference between the two, with a p-value of < 0.01, demonstrating the overexpression of CBS in human colon adenocarcinoma. The results are in agreement with other reports in the literature [59], demonstrating that the CoGPCs/G-FET biosensor has the ability to in situ and ultra-sensitively monitor the release of H2S from living cells in real-time.
4. Conclusion
In summary, we have successfully constructed a FET biosensor based on cobalt phthalocyanine functionalized graphene, which is capable of real-time monitoring H2S with a high sensitivity. In addition, the biosensor also has good stability, selectivity and biocompatibility, fast detection speed. Furthermore, the biosensor has been applied to real-time monitor H2S release from different cells types. The results indicate that different cell types release different amount of H2S, providing important information for differentiating cell types by assessing extracellular H2S levels. By examining the effects of different inhibitors on H2S release from colon cancer cells, we find that CBS may be a more promising drug target than CSE. This work provides a new method to monitor the release of H2S in situ and in real time, which may help us to better understand the mechanism of H2S production in colon cancer and provide important information and theoretical support for CBS as a new drug target.
Supporting Information

 Phthalocyanine-functionalized field-eﬀect transistor biosensor for in situ monitoring of cell-released hydrogen sulfide

Ling Xiaoa, Shanshan Yua, Qing Cuia, Jiacheng Liua, Guowu Lianga, Yutao Lia,b*, Guo-Jun Zhanga,b*

aSchool of Laboratory Medicine, Hubei University of Chinese Medicine, 16 Huangjia Lake West Road, Wuhan 430065, China
bHubei Shizhen laboratory, 16 Huangjia Lake West Road, Wuhan 430065, P.R. China




















Fig. S1. Stability of the CoGPCs@G-FET sensor. (a) Transmission characteristic curve of the CoGPCs@G-FET sensor after one week in the vacuum drying oven. (b) Histogram of the corresponding electrical signal variation. The error bars represent the standard deviation of the measurement (n=3). 



Fig. S2. Comparison of cell viability between the G-FET and CoGPCs/G-FET in CCK-8 experiments.


Fig. S3. (a) Transfer characteristic curve and (b) real-time current response of G-FET in different concentrations of Na2S.





Fig. S4. Reversibility study of the CoGPCs/G-FET device. (a) Dirac point voltage values corresponding to the CoGPCs/G-FET biosensor in 10 nM and 1 μM Na2S solutions; (b) Percentage pH response of the CoGPCs/G-FET biosensor for three reversibility experiments, with error bars denoting the standard deviation (n=3).

Fig. S5. Real-time current response of the CoGPCs@G-FET sensor to H2S generated by SW-480 under (a) different cell density and (b) different concentrations of stimulant stimulation conditions.









Table S1: Comparison of different sensors for the determination of H2S
Materials	Methods	Sensitivity (nM)	Reference
Naphthalimide	Fluorescence	300	Choi [1]
DB2T	Fluorescence	6.39	Quan [2]
Cu- doped NIR-CDs	Fluorescence	56	Pang [3]
MoS2–ZnCo2O4–ZnCo2O4	Electrochemistry	5	Mani [4]
POPD/RGO-MoS2	Electrochemistry	10	Jeromiyas [5]
CNTs@CuMn-LDH
nanohybrids	Electrochemistry	0.3	Asif [6]
Cu2O nanocubes	Electrochemistry	0.23	Gu [7]
MoSe2	FET	1000	Sharma [8]
RGO/CoGPCs	FET	0.01	Our work


References:
[1] S.-A. Choi, C.S. Park, O.S. Kwon, H.-K. Giong, J.-S. Lee, T.H. Ha, C.-S. Lee, Structural effects of naphthalimide-based fluorescent sensor for hydrogen sulfide and imaging in live zebrafish, Sci. Rep. 6 (2016) 26203.
[2] Y.-Y. Quan, L. Fan, H. Shen, B. Wu, S. Kong, Y. Luo, Z.-S. Huang, X. Ye, A multifunctional BODIPY based fluorescent probe for hydrogen sulfide detection and photodynamic anticancer therapy in HCT116 colon cancer cell, Dyes Pigm. 197 (2022) 109897.
[3] L.-F. Pang, Y.-C. Sun, X.-F. Guo, H. Wang, Cell membrane-targeted near-infrared carbon dots for imaging of hydrogen sulfide released through the cell membrane, Sens. Actuators B Chem. 345 (2021) 130403.
[4] V. Mani, S. Selvaraj, N. Jeromiyas, S.-T. Huang, H. Ikeda, Y. Hayakawa, S. Ponnusamy, C. Muthamizhchelvan, K.N. Salama, Growth of large-scale MoS2 nanosheets on double layered ZnCo2O4 for real-time in situ H2S monitoring in live cells, J. Mater. Chem. B 8 (2020) 7453-7465.
[5] N. Jeromiyas, V. Mani, P.-C. Chang, C.-H. Huang, K.N. Salama, S.-T. Huang, Anti-poisoning electrode for real-time in-situ monitoring of hydrogen sulfide release, Sens. Actuators B Chem. 326 (2021) 128844.
[6] M. Asif, A. Aziz, Z. Wang, G. Ashraf, J. Wang, H. Luo, X. Chen, F. Xiao, H. Liu, Hierarchical CNTs@CuMn Layered Double Hydroxide Nanohybrid with Enhanced Electrochemical Performance in H2S Detection from Live Cells, Anal. Chem. 91 (2019) 3912-3920.
[7] W. Gu, W. Zheng, H. Liu, Y. Zhao, Electroactive Cu2O nanocubes engineered electrochemical sensor for H2S detection, Anal. Chim. Acta 1150 (2021) 338216.
[8] S. Sharma, A. Moudgil, S. Singh, P. Mishra, S. Das, Highly Sensitive, Rapid, and Real-Time Detection of Hydrogen Sulfide in Human Blood Plasma Using MoSe2 Field-Effect Transistor, IEEE Trans Electron Devices 70 (2023) 275-280.

