Ultrasensitive and Selective Organic FET-type Nonenzymatic Dopamine Sensor Based on Platinum Nanoparticles-Decorated Reduced Graphene Oxide
Jungkyun OhJun Seop LeeJaemoon JunSung Gun KimJyongsik Jang*Orcid
View Author InformationView Author Information
Open PDF
Supporting Information (1)
OpenURL ARGONNE NATL LABORATORY
Abstract

Dopamine (DA), a catecholamine hormone, is an important neurotransmitter that controls renal and cardiovascular organizations and regulates physiological activities. Abnormal concentrations of DA cause unfavorable neuronal illnesses such as Parkinson’s disease, schizophrenia, and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder/attention deficit disorder. However, the DA concentration is exceedingly low in patients and difficult to detect with existing biosensors. In this study, we developed an organic field-effect-transistor-type (OFET) nonenzyme biosensor using platinum nanoparticle-decorated reduced graphene oxide (Pt_rGO) for ultrasensitive and selective DA detection. The Pt_rGOs were fabricated by reducing GO aqueous solution-containing Pt precursors (PtCl4) with a chemical reducing agent. The Pt_rGOs were immobilized on a graphene substrate by π–π interactions and a conducting-polymer source–drain electrode was patterned on the substrate to form the DA sensor. The resulting OFET sensor showed a high sensitivity to remarkably low DA concentrations (100 × 10–18 M) and selectivity among interfering molecules. Good stability was expected for the OFET sensor because it was fabricated without an enzymatic receptor, and π–π conjugation is a part of the immobilization process. Furthermore, the OFET sensors are flexible and offer the possibility of wide application as wearable and portable sensors.

This publication is licensed under the terms of your institutional subscription. Request reuse permissions.

Copyright © 2017 American Chemical Society
Subjects
what are subjects
Metal nanoparticles
Molecules
Platinum
Sensors
Two dimensional materials
Keywords
what are keywords
dopamine
electrochemical sensor
field-effect-transistor
reduced graphene oxide
wearable sensor
portable sensor
Introduction
Dopamine (DA), a neurotransmitter, has been extensively studied because it plays an important role in the renal, hormonal, and cardiovascular systems and regulates numerous physiological activities. Abnormal levels of DA are related to certain neurological disorders, such as Parkinson’s disease, drug addiction, and schizophrenia. (1-5) Clinically, detection of low DA concentration is essential because the DA concentration in urine, plasma, and single adrenal chromaffin cells is in the range of 10–6, 10–9, and 10–15 M, respectively. Therefore, several quantitative analytical methods have been developed to detect DA for the purpose of cellular investigations and biomedical diagnosis. High-performance liquid chromatography and mass spectroscopy have very low DA detection limits. (6, 7) However, these methods are inexpensive and they require sample pretreatments and special instrumentation. Enzymatic-assay-based methods have also attracted considerable attention due to their high sensitivity and comparative low cost. (8, 9) Despite these advantages, these methods are not commonly used due to their low stability and complicated process to attach the enzyme to the transducer. Therefore, a simple analytical method is needed for DA detection that offers high sensitivity and high target selectivity.
New electrochemical methods have been developed to detect low DA concentrations. Notably, the field-effect transistor (FET)-based sensor has the advantages of miniaturization, simple operation, fast response, reliability, and high sensitivity to the target analyte. (10-15) These characteristics are useful for diagnoses at the early stages of diseases. However, fabrication of the source–drain electrode for the FET-type sensor requires several complex and time-consuming processes, such as photolithography and thermal vapor deposition, used to pattern the gold source–drain electrode on the substrate surface. (16-20) Hence, electrode patterning using a conducting polymer (CP) is attractive due to its cost effectiveness and facile fabrication method. (21-25) CP electrode-based sensors have as high sensing performances as those of gold-patterned FET-type sensors and have many potential applications in portable or wearable electronic devices. They also exhibit great promise for chemical and biological sensor applications. (26-29)
Solution-processed CPs have been anticipated as materials for flexible devices due to facile synthesis, high electrical conductivity, and various morphologies with diverse substrates. (30, 31) Especially, polyaniline/camphorsulfonic acid (PANI/CSA) has been greatly expected as a material for flexible devices because of its high electrical conductivity and excellent free processiblity with organic solvents. In particular, the solution-processed PANI/CSA displays 102–103 times higher electrical conductivity than that of pristine PANI powder without doping due to change of polymer chain conformation with bonding to CSA in the organic solvent. (32) As a result, the coil conformation of the PANI chains becomes more expanded that leads to elevated electrical conductivity of the PANI. (33)
Recently, various inorganic nanocomposites have been decorated on graphene sheets. For example, graphene sheets decorated with metal nanocomposites has been used in fuel cells, batteries, and transducers for sensors because their electrical and semiconducting properties were greatly improved over those of pristine metals or graphene alone. (34-37) This behavior was attributed to the metal composites preventing aggregation of the graphene sheets and improved electron transport. (38)
Herein, we suggest the fabrication of an organic FET-type (OFET) nonenzymatic biosensor to detect DA. Water-stable p-channel semiconductor, platinum nanoparticle-decorated reduced graphene oxide (Pt_rGO), was fabricated as the DA detection material by chemical reduction. The Pt_rGO solution was easily attached on a substrate using spin-coating, and the source–drain electrode pattern was screen-printed onto the DA detecting layer with a CP to fabricate the sensor. For widespread use as a DA sensor, the detection level must be as low as 10–15 M. Our sensor demonstrated enhanced sensitivity to DA at the low concentration of 10–16 M and displayed high selectivity to the target analyte in the presence of interfering molecules, such as uric acid (UA), ascorbic acid (AA), epinephrine (EP), and norepinephrine (NE). Our DA sensor has a longer lifetime than that of aptamer-attached biosensors. Furthermore, its flexibility offers the possibility of wearable and portable sensors.
Results and Discussion
Fabrication of the OFET-type Nonenzymatic DA Sensor
Figure 1 schematically illustrates a Pt_rGO-based OFET sensor configuration. Large-scale graphene was synthesized by the chemical vapor deposition (CVD) method and transferred to a poly(ethylene naphthalene) substrate for flexibility. (39) Furthermore, a large-area graphene sheet was fabricated by CVD with the object of immobilizing the Pt_rGO substrate. The transducer materials could be immobilized on the sensor substrate to improve stability by the π–π conjugation of the resonance structures of carbon rings. The stability in the liquid-ion solution was one of the critical factors in the fabrication of the ultrasensitive FET biosensor electrodes. Figure S1 shows a TEM image of the CVD graphene surface and an high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HR-TEM) image of the CVD graphene layer. The HR-TEM image of Figure S1 reveals that two-layer graphene sheets were created by the CVD process.
Figure 1

Figure 1. Illustrative diagram of the sequence of steps for the fabrication of the organic field-effect-transistor-type (OFET) sensor using chemical vapor deposition (CVD) graphene, polyaniline/camphorsulfonic acid (PANI/CSA) and Pt-decorated reduced graphene oxide (Pt_rGO).

The Pt_rGO aqueous solution was spin-coated on the large-area graphene sheet to form a stable and homogeneous receptor layer for highly sensitive analyte adsorption. The Pt_rGO component was anchored on the CVD graphene without any surface treatment by π–π stacking between the carbon rings of Pt_rGO and the plane of graphene. Figure 2 illustrates the decoration of platinum (Pt) nanoparticles on the rGO surface by the chemical reduction process. The Pt cations were adsorbed onto the GO surface as a result of the charge–charge interactions between the positive charge of the Pt cations and the partial negative charge of the oxygen atoms in the GO structure. (40, 41) The reducing agent (NaBH4) was added to the aqueous solution to concurrently transform the Pt4+ to Pt0 and the GO to rGO to form Pt-decorated rGO (Pt_rGO), as shown in Figure 3a. Figure 3b shows HR-TEM images of Pt_rGO interplanar spacings between the noble metal nanoparticles of 0.2 and 0.23 nm diameters for the [200] and [111] planes, respectively, according to the Pt FCC lattice structure. Figure S2 shows TEM images of the GO sheet and the density of the Pt nanoparticles on rGO, controlled by the concentration of PtCl4 aqueous solution. Each Pt_rGO obtained 4.0–4.5 nm Pt nanoparticle radii and were labeled with different densities of Pt nanoparticles as Pt_rGO_0.5 (Figure S2b), Pt_rGO_2.5 (Figure S2c), and Pt_rGO_5.0 (Figure 3a). The aggregation of Pt nanoparticles appeared on the surface of rGO when the concentration of PtCl4 aqueous solution exceeded 5.0 × 10–4 M, Figure S2d.
Figure 2

Figure 2. Schematic diagram of the fabrication steps for the Pt nanoparticle-decorated reduced graphene oxide (Pt_rGO).

Figure 3

Figure 3. (a) TEM and (b) HR-TEM images of the Pt_rGO_5.0 sheet.

For further understanding, element analysis methods were used and Figure S3 shows the results. Figure S3a shows the X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of GO and Pt_rGO_5.0. The result confirmed that the platinum precursor was reduced well by the reducing agent (NaBH4). Raman spectroscopy was used to analyze the structure and quality of the carbonaceous materials, as shown in Figure S3b. The result suggested that GO was partially reduced. Under our experimental condition, sensing nanomaterials require semiconducting ability and partially reduced GO sheets were suitable for our research. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) characterization, as shown in Figure S3c–f, was used to analyze the elemental composition of the hybrid nanomaterials. The XPS spectrum of pristine GO revealed only the presence of C and O atoms, whereas the spectrum of Pt_rGO_5.0 expressed the presence of C, O, and Pt atoms. The presence of Pt atoms in the Pt_rGO_5.0 spectrum indicated that Pt nanoparticles had been deposited onto the surface of the rGO. Also, the Pt 4f high-resolution spectrum of Pt_rGO_5.0 is exhibited in Figure S3f.
Figure S4a depicts a schematic diagram of the OFET, and Figure S4b presents an field-effect scanning electron microscopy (FE-SEM) image of the Pt_rGO-attached graphene sheet. A source–drain electrode pattern was screen-printed on the surface of the Pt_rGO-immobilized CVD graphene sheet using PANI/CSA. The PANI/CSA also adhered to the Pt_rGO-immobilized CVD graphene surface due to π–π stacking between the carbon rings of the components. The real device is presented in Figure 4a. Also, the enlarged sensing part of the device is demonstrated in Figure 4b. In Figure 4b, solution-processed PANI/CSA, screen-printed on the surface of Pt_rGO-attached CVD graphene, had no blur effect due to suitable viscosity for patterning and π–π stacking between the carbon rings of the components. Spin-coated Pt_rGO sheets, dopamine sensing materials, covered the gap between branch-shaped PANI/CSA electrodes and connected them. As a result, this device could work as a dopamine sensing device in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) solution phase. Additional details of the fabrication process are noted in the Materials and Methods Section.
Figure 4

Figure 4. Photographs of (a) OFET dopamine sensor device and (b) enlarged sensing part of the device.

Characterization of the OFET-type Nonenzymatic DA Sensor
To characterize electrical properties of Pt_rGOs in liquid phase, electrolyte was used as a liquid-ion gate in the OFET configuration. The liquid-ion gate is capable of achieving increased transconductance owing to the intimate contact between the NPs and the gate, compared with conventional back-gating. (42) Current–voltage (I–V) curves were analyzed to estimate the electrical contact of Pt_rGOs on the large-scale CVD graphene surface. Figure 5a shows the ISD–VSD properties of each Pt_rGO-made different Pt nanoparticle populations for the case of VG = 0. The curves were of a linear form for the voltage from −0.1 to 0.1 V, and then the dI/dV value increased with growing numbers of Pt nanoparticles on the rGO surface. According to the results, Pt nanoparticles enhanced the conductivity of the rGO sheets (Figure S5). The feasibility of the flexible device was also confirmed by current–voltage (I–V) curves at VG = 0. The DA sensor device was folded 100 times by a folding machine (Figure S6), and the ISD–VSD properties of each Pt_rGO, made by different Pt nanoparticle populations, was remeasured for the case of VG = 0. There were just little differences of the Pt_rGO dI/dV values after 100 times of folding. Furthermore, the influence of folding was decreasing with growing numbers of Pt nanoparticles on the rGO surface. As a result, the folding process gave no influence to conductivity of Pt_rGO sheets and it showed the possibility for a flexible and portable sensor. Moreover, the source–drain current (ISD) for various VG’s at a constant scan rate of 100 mV s–1 of the source–drain voltage (VSD) validated the charge transport characteristics of Pt_rGOs in OFET configuration. Figure 6 exhibits ISD–VSD plots for various VG’s for Pt_rGO sheets with different amounts of Pt nanoparticles. The source–drain current (ISD) was negatively increased with negatively increasing VG, signifying a p-type property for the Pt_rGO; this semiconductor was attributed to hole transport caused by an increase in the oxidation level of the rGO chains of Pt_rGO. In Figure 6, the increase of Pt nanoparticle amount on the rGO sheet demonstrated the demolition of p-type charge transport properties in the FET configuration because Pt nanoparticles limited the semiconductance of rGO sheets. However, the function of p-type semiconductance was still maintained and it is shown well in Figure 6c. The analysis of the dependence of ISD on VG suggested that a Pt_rGO-based OFET could function as an electrochemical sensor for the detection of specific analytes in the liquid phase.
Figure 5

Figure 5. (a) Source–drain current–voltage (ISD–VSD) curves of OFETs with different Pt_rGOs without a gate potential voltage (VG) before folding. (b) Source–drain current–voltage (ISD–VSD) curves of OFETs with different Pt_rGOs without a gate potential voltage (VG) after folding 100 times.

Figure 6

Figure 6. Source–drain current–voltage (ISD–VSD) curves of (a) Pt_rGO_0.5, (b) Pt_rGO_2.5, and (c) Pt_rGO_5.0 OFET electrodes for variable gate voltages (VG) ranging from 0 to 1000 mV in 100 mV steps.

Real-Time Response of the OFET-type Nonenzymatic DA Sensor
The Pt_rGOs uniformly immobilized on the OFET sensor surface rapidly detected DA at room temperature via charge transfer of electrons. Although DA aqueous solution was injected into PBS solution, DA molecules were attached to surface of Pt_rGO due to π–π interactions between benzene rings of rGO and DA molecules. (43-47) The catalytic effect of Pt nanoparticles oxidized DA molecules to dopamine-o-quinone molecules. At this time, two hydrogen atoms and two electrons were released simultaneously from each DA molecule and released electrons transferred to rGO. The illustrative diagram of the dopamine detecting mechanism is demonstrated in Figure S7. Because rGO acts as a p-type transducer, the number of holes in the rGO structure was decreased and ISD was also diminished through this property. To measure the sensing ability of an OFET sensor, the change in current as a function of the DA concentration was observed in real time at constant VG (1 V) and VSD (10 mV). Figure 7a describes the real-time responses of the OFET sensors as a function of DA concentrations for different amounts of Pt nanoparticles decorated on rGO. The OFET sensor showed a rapid real-time response (<1 s) to the target and exhibited a concentration-dependent reduction in the ISD on exposure to different analyte concentrations. The sensitivity of the OFET sensor improved with increasing amounts, and radius of Pt nanoparticles increased on the rGO surface. The increment of the number and radius of Pt nanoparticles on the rGO surface increased the surface area of Pt_rGOs. We calculated the surface area of rGO, Pt_rGO_2.5, and Pt_rGO_5.0 by the Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) instrument, and it resulted as 13.6806, 25.1363, and 47.7263 m2 g–1, respectively (Figure S8). Because a larger surface area gave more chance to DA to make contact with Pt_rGO, the catalytic activity toward oxidizing DA molecules was increased with increasing surface area. Because greater numbers and radius of Pt nanoparticles displayed better catalytic activity toward oxidizing DA molecules, the sensing ability to DA molecules also increased in the same manner. Hence, the OFETs, made from Pt_rGO_0.5, Pt_rGO_2.5, and Pt_rGO_5.0, were capable of detecting DA concentrations as low as 10–12, 10–14, and 10–16 M at room temperature, respectively. Figure 7b exhibits the calibration curve for the detection ability of the OFET sensor. The sensitivity (S) symbolizes the normalized current changes (ΔI/I0 × 100) measured after analyte particles were injected. The Pt_rGO with the most Pt nanoparticles suggested the highest sensitivity over a wide range of DA concentrations. To compare the performance of a liquid-ion gate sensor device with the conventional method, a back-gate DA sensing device was manufactured and the DA sensing test was performed with it. The schematic diagram of a back-gate DA sensing device is shown in Figure S10a. Pt_rGO_5.0, the best performing sensing material, was used as the sensing material for the back-gate sensing device. As a result, it showed the same detection limit as that with the liquid-ion gate, shown in Figure S10b. However, the current changes of back-gate sensing were smaller than those in the liquid-ion gate and the signals with high concentration were unstable. Also, saturation appeared faster than in the liquid-ion gate at 10–4 M. This phenomenon was caused because the liquid-ion gate is capable of achieving more increased transconductance than back-gating, as mentioned above.
Figure 7

Figure 7. (a) Real-time responses of the different OFETs to various dopamine concentrations comprising effects of Pt nanoparticle densities of Pt_rGOs, with normalized current changes (ΔI/I0 = (I – I0)/I0, where I0 is the initial current and I is the instantaneous current). (b) Calibration curves of OFETs comprising various Pt nanoparticle densities of Pt_rGOs (S signifies the normalized current changes).

The selectivity of the OFET sensor to DA was investigated (Figure 8a). Six different organic molecules (tyrosine (TR), phenethylamine (PEA), uric acid (UA), ascorbic acid (AA), norepinephrine (NE), and epinephrine (EP)), were chosen as nontarget molecules for the sensor. NE and EP were selected due to their molecular structure similar to that of DA. UA and AA were chosen because these molecules appear with DA in some animal tissues. TR and PEA were selected owing to not only their like molecular structures being similar to that of DA but also their appearance with DA in some animal tissues. The structures of the six organic molecules are illustrated in Figure S9. All nontarget analytes were injected into the OFET sensor at a concentration of 10–11 M. No significant current changes of TR, PEA, AA, and UA and small current changes of AA and UA were observed after injection. However, a large change in ISD was detected with 10–12 M of DA, which indicated a high selectivity to DA molecules by the OFET sensor. AA and UA caused no current changes due to the absence of phenyl groups in their molecular structures, which led to only weak π–π interactions between the receptor and analyte. Despite their similar structures to those of DA, TR, and TEA also, they showed no current changes owing to the absence of catechol structures that induced the catalytic reaction between Pt and analytes. NE and EP presented unimpressive sensitivity to the OFET sensor compared with DA. The side chains of NE and EP attached to their catechol structures increased their dimensions to longer than those of the DA chain. Consequently, the increased size of these biomolecules reduced the effects of π–π interactions and catalytic activities of the Pt nanoparticles. Figure 8b shows the outstanding change in the signal observed for DA in a solution of analytes consisting of a mixture of 1 pM of each of the six nontarget organic molecules. The same concentration of DA solution was added to the mixture. There was insignificant difference between the size of the signal for 1 pM of DA present in the mixture (Figure 8b) and alone (Figure 7a).
Figure 8

Figure 8. (a) Real-time responses of OFET biosensor to target (dopamine (DA)) and nontarget (tyrosine (TR), phenethylamine (PEA), ascorbic acid (AA), uric acid (UA), epinephrine (EP), and norepinephrine (NE)) analytes. (b) Real-time responses of the OFET nonenzyme biosensor for variable analytes (analytes were phosphate-buffered saline (PBS), mixture without DA, and mixture with DA).

Clearly, the interferents did not affect the OFET sensor and did not affect its ability to detect DA molecules. Table S1 presents the optimal analytical characteristics of the OFET sensor; details of other electrochemical sensors are also listed. The OFET sensor demonstrated impressive analytical performance, namely, better selectivity, faster response time, wider linear range, and a lower detection limit, than those of other electrochemical sensors reported to date.
Figure 9a depicts the response changes of the OFET sensor after repeated folding and relaxing sequences. The detailed experimental process is illustrated in Figure S6. Flexibility is important for biosensor development because the development of flexible, portable, or wearable sensors has proven particularly challenging. After 1000 cycles of repeated folding and relaxing, the performance of the OFET sensor was diminished by less than 5%. This result clearly indicates the excellent flexibility and durability of the OFET sensor and suggests the feasibility of manufacturing flexible biosensors. Figure 9b illustrates the stability over several weeks of OFET sensors having various Pt densities provided by Pt_rGOs. Good sensor stability is especially important. To confirm the reusability of an OFET sensor, the same OFET electrode was used every week to detect DA at a constant concentration of 10–12 M. Washing and rinsing of the electrode was repeated several times to eliminate any residue on the OFET sensor after a sensing test. Figure 9b shows that the sensor maintained its sensitivity over 4 weeks; this was attributed to two key factors. First, the organization of the OFET sensor did not require enzymatic bioreceptors to detect the biomolecules. The structure of a bioreceptor is easily transformed by environmental changes, and a biosensor containing a bioreceptor is usually inactivated by harsh conditions. However, the OFET sensor based on Pt_rGOs preserved its sensing performance under various circumstances. Second, π–π bonds between CVD graphene and the rGOs maintained the constitution of the OFET sensor. Other sensing performance indicators, such as selectivity and the minimum detectable level, were also maintained for the reasons mentioned above.
Figure 9

Figure 9. (a) Sensing performance of the OFET biosensor formed with Pt_rGO_5.0 after a large number of bending cycles. Measurements were obtained after every 200 cycles. (b) Sensing performance of various OFET DA sensors at 1 week intervals over 4 weeks.

Conclusions
In summary, Pt_rGO-based OFET sensors with a conducting-polymer-patterned electrode were readily fabricated using screen-printing methods. This approach did not require any chemical surface treatments of the components. The Pt_rGOs were produced by a chemical reduction process. The density of Pt nanoparticles decorated on rGOs intensified the oxidation of DA, thereby increasing the sensitivity of the OFET sensor to DA. The OFET sensor exhibited extremely high sensitivity to DA concentration, i.e., 10–16 M. To our best knowledge, this concentration is 103–104 times higher than previous researches of other DA sensors. Furthermore, the OFET sensor had equal performance to DA regardless of the presence of interferents. The sensor performed with excellent long term stability owing to π–π interactions between the organic components and the absence of an enzymatic receptor on the sensor. The flexibility and performance of the OFET sensor device suggests the possibility of developing flexible, wearable, and portable sensors.
Materials and Methods
Materials
Graphite flake, poly(vinyl alcohol) (MW 9000), FeCl3 (97%), aniline (99%), ammonium persulfate (98.0%), camphorsulfonic acid (CSA, 98%), and sodium borohydride (NaBH4, 99%) were purchased from Aldrich Chemical Company. Platinum(IV) chloride (99%) was acquired from Kojima Chemicals Company. Copper foil (99.8%) was obtained from Alfa Aesar. Ammonia solution (NH3), chloroform (CHCl3), and hydrochloric acid (HCl, 35%) were acquired from Samchun Company. m-Cresol was obtained from Tokyo Chemical Industry which was used as the solvent for the polyaniline/camphorsulfonic acid (PANI/CSA).
Fabrication of Pt_rGO
GO was prepared by a modification of the Hummers method. It was dispersed in distilled water at 0.1 wt %, and then various concentrations (3–30 mmol) of aqueous PtCl4 solution were added. A reducing agent (NaBH4, 5 mmol) was injected into the mixed aqueous solution. Then, the mixture was stirred for 2 h at a suitable temperature to transform the GO into rGO, resulting in Pt_rGO. The solution was sonicated for 2 h using a tip sonicator and dried for sufficient hours to provide Pt_rGO powder.
Fabrication of the OFET-type Nonenzymatic DA Sensor
The OFET nonenzymatic DA sensor was fabricated as follows. A large (2 × 2 cm2) graphene surface was prepared by chemical vapor deposition (CVD). (39) Aqueous Pt_rGO solution (0.05 wt %) was cast onto the graphene by spin-coating at 500 rpm for 20 s, which formed Pt_rGO adsorbed onto the CVD graphene, and then additionally spun at 1000 rpm for 10 s. The coating was dried in a 60 °C oven for several hours. After drying, the source–drain electrode pattern was screen-printed using PANI/CSA, synthesized according to the procedures of Cho et al. (48)
Electrical Measurement of the OFET-type Nonenzymatic DA Sensor
All electrical measurements were measured using Keithley 2612A source meter and probe station (MS TECH, Model 4000) in pH 7.4 of PBS solution. To utilize the solution-based measurement, a glass bath was designed and used. The change in the current was as follows

where I0 represents the initial current and I is the real-time measured current. Because the dopamine is very sensitive with outdoor light, the measurement was processed in a blackout box with a blackout curtain. Also, DA solution vials were commonly wrapped with parafilm and an aluminum foil to protect them from the harsh environment, such as light and humidity.
Instruments
Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and high-resolution TEM (HR-TEM) images were obtained with JEOL JEM–200CX and JEOL JEM–3010 microscopes, respectively. A JEOL 6700 instrument was used to acquire field-effect scanning electron microscopy (FE-SEM) images. X-ray photoelectron spectra (XPS) were recorded using an Axis-His (KRATOS) instrument.
Supporting Information
The Supporting Information is available free of charge on the ACS Publications website at DOI: 10.1021/acsami.7b15093.

(1) TEM and HR-TEM images of two layer graphene sheets using chemical vapor deposition; (2) TEM images of Pt_rGOs with several concentrations of PtCl4 aqueous solutions; (3) material analysis of Pt_rGO_5.0; (4) schematic diagram of OFET and SEM image of Pt_rGO attached graphene surface; (5) electrical characteristics of GO, rGO and Pt_rGO_5.0; (6) photographs of the OFET dopamine sensor undr different formation; (7) schematic diagram of dopamine detection mechanism of OFET sensors; (8) BET analysis for surface area of rGO hybrid materials; (9) molecular structures of dopamine and its analogs; (10) DA sensor using back gate system (11) comparison of the Pt_rGO-modified dopamine sensor with other electrochemical detection (PDF)
Supporting Information Ultrasensitive and Selective Organic FETtype Non enzymatic Dopamine Sensor Based on Platinum Nanoparticles Decorated Reduced Graphene Oxide Jungkyun Oh, Jun Seop Lee, Jaemoon Jun, Sung Gun Kim and Jyongsik Jang* School of Chemical and Biological Engineering, College of Engineering, Seoul National University (SNU), 599 Gwanangno, Gwanakgu, Seoul, 151742 (korea) †Tel: 8228808348; Fax: +8228887295; email: jsjang@plaza.snu.ac.kr 11. TEM and HR-TEM images of two-layer graphene sheets using chemical vapor deposition  CVD graphene 2 Layer Figure S1. (a) TEM and (b) HRTEM images of twolayer graphene sheets prepared by chemical vapor deposition (CVD) method. 22. TEM images of Pt_rGOs with several concentrations of PtCl4 aqueous solutions GO Pt_rGO_2.5 Pt_rGO_0.5 Pt_rGO_10.0 Figure S2. TEM images of Pt_rGOs made from different concentrations of PtCl4 aqueous solutions: (a) GO, (b) 0.5 × 10–4M (Pt_rGO_0.5), (c) 2.5 × 10–4M (Pt_rGO_2.5) and (d) 10.0 × 10–4M (Pt_rGO_10.0). 3 4 3. Material analysis of Pt_rGO_5.0 Figure S3. (a) Xray diffraction (XRD) patterns of GO (black) and Pt_rGO (red). (b) Raman spectra of Pt_rGO (red) and GO (black). Xray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) spectra of (c) Pt_rGO_5.0 and GO. Highresolution C 1s spectra of (d) GO, (e) Pt_rGO_5.0, and (f) Pt 4f. Figure S3a shows the Xray diffraction (XRD) patterns of GO and Pt_rGO. GO exhibited two diffraction peaks at 10.1° and 20.9°. The sharp peak at 10.1° corresponds to the reflection of the few layer structure of the graphene sheet and the peak at 20.9° illustrated the corrugated structure of the sheets. However, both peaks disappeared after the chemical reduction step that formed Pt_rGO and were replaced by a broad and weak peak from 20.7° to 31.3° that symbolized the property of rGO. The strong diffraction peaks at 40.2° and 46.6° were belong to the (111) and (200) reflections of the facecentered cubic (fcc) platinum lattice. This result confirmed that the platinum precursor, PtCl4, was reduced to platinum nanoparticles by the reducing agent (NaBH4). Raman spectroscopy was used to analyze the structure and quality of the carbonaceous materials, as shown in Figure S3b. The spectra exhibited a remarkable D band at 1330 cm–1 and a G band at 1590 cm–1. Furthermore, the ratio of the G band to the D band (IG/ID) for Pt_rGO (ca. 0.98) was higher than that of GO (ca. 0.8) and the peaks of Pt_rGO were sharper than another. The D band relates to disordered structures and defects of the sp2 domains, while the G band is associated with firstorder 1200 1400 1600 1800 G peak IG/ID = 0.98 IG/ID = 0.8 Pt_rGO_5.0 GO Intensity (a.u.) Raman shift (cm1)  D peak (b) 10 20 30 40 50  Intensity (a.u.) 2θ θθ θ (degree) Pt_rGO_5.0 GO (a) 0 200 400 600 800 1000 Intensity (a.u.) Binding Energy (eV) Pt_rGO_5.0 GOs Pt4f C 1s O 1s C 1s O 1s (c) 280 282 284 286 288 290 292  Intensity (a.u.) Binding Energy (eV) Overall C-C C=C C-O COOH GOs (d) 280 282 284 286 288 290 292  Intensity (a.u.) Binding Energy (eV) Overall C=C C-O COOH C-C Pt_rGO_5.0 (e) 68 70 72 74 76 78  Intensity (a.u.) Binding Energy (eV) Pt 4f Pt 4f7/2 (71.4 eV) Pt 4f5/2 (74.6 eV) (f)scattering of the E2g vibrational mode of sp2 carbon domains. The ratio is commonly used to describe the degree of graphitization. Therefore, the Raman spectra results indicated that the GO nanosheets were successfully converted into graphitic carbon via chemical reduction. However, the IG/ID ratio of Raman spectroscopy for the Pt_rGO was much lower than that of totally reduced graphene oxide (trGO) (ca. 1.4).1 This suggests that controlling the reducing agent concentration may provide only partially reduced GO. Although trGO exhibits a higher conductivity than rGO due to fewer sp2 carbon domain defects, our experiments were indicative of rGO rather than trGO, since it displayed semiconductor characteristics. Under our experimental condition, sensing nanomaterials require semiconducting ability, and trGO was not semiconductor. XPS characterization was used to analyze the elemental composition of the hybrid nanomaterials. Figure S3c displays the wide range spectra of pristine GO and Pt_rGO_5.0 over 0 – 1000 eV. The XPS spectrum of pristine GO revealed only the presence of C and O atoms, while the spectrum of Pt_rGO_5.0 expressed the presence of C, O and Pt atoms. The presence of Pt atoms in the Pt_rGO_5.0 spectrum indicated that Pt nanoparticles had been deposited onto the surface of the rGO. Figure S3c gives evidence of partially reduced GO. The O 1s peak region of Pt_rGO_5.0 was slightly less intense than that of GO, which meant a few oxygencontaining functional groups remained on Pt_rGO_5.0. The partially reduced aspect of rGO is further revealed in Figure S3d and S3e. Figure S3d illustrates the C 1s peak region of GO, indicating distinguishable four peaks corresponding to C–C bonds (ca. 284.6 eV), C=C bonds (ca. 284.5 eV), C–O bonds (ca. 286.6 eV), and carboxyl groups (ca. 288.2 eV). Figure S3e shows the C 1s peak region of Pt_rGO_5.0. The peaks at 286.8 eV (C–O) and 289.0 eV (carboxyl group) were less intense when GO was transformed into Pt_rGO_5.0, owing to bond breakage between C and O in the C–OH groups and C–C between sp2 carbons and the carboxyl groups of GO by the chemical reduction process. The Pt 4f highresolution spectrum of Pt_rGO_5.0 was exhibited in Figure S3f. Because the spinorbit split doublet corresponds to zerovalent metallic state Pt 4f7/2 and Pt 4f5/2, two peaks with binding energy values of 71.4 eV and 74.6 eV show the valance state of Pt+4. 54. Schematic diagram of OFET and SEM image of Pt_rGO attached graphene surface CVD graphene Pt_rGO Figure S4. (a) Schematic diagram of the OFET. (b) SEM image of Pt_rGO adhered to the CVD graphene surface. 65. Electrical characteristics of GO, rGO and Pt_rGO_5.0 Conductivity (S cm1) 150 100 50 0 (46.5 S cm1) (101.5 S cm1) GO rGO Pt_rGO_5.0 Figure S5. Electrical conductivities of rGObased hybrid materials (red : rGO; green : Pt_rGO). 76. Photographs of the OFET dopamine sensor under different formation Figure S6. Photographs of different structures of the OFET sensor: (a) flat and (b) folded. 87. Schematic diagram of dopamine detection mechanism of OFET sensors Dopamine (DA) HO HO NH2 pipi interaction Dopamine-o-quinone (DQ) Oxidized ( 2eand 2H) 2 e pipi interaction Figure S7. Dopamine molecule detection mechanism of OFET sensors at room temperature. 9 10 8. BET analysis for surface area of rGO hybrid materials Figure S8. BET analysis for surface area of (a) rGO, (b) Pt_rGO_2.5, and (c) Pt_rGO_5.0. 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 0 10 20 30 40 50  Volume STP (cm3 g1) Relative pressure (P/P0 ) rGO 13.6806 m2 g1 (a) 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 0 10 20 30 40 50  Volume STP (cm3 g1) Relative pressure (P/P0 ) Pt_rGO_2.5 25.1363 m2 g1 (b) 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 0 10 20 30 40 50 47.7263 m2 g1  Volume STP (cm3 g1) Relative pressure (P/P0 ) Pt_rGO_5.0 (c)9. Molecular structures of dopamine and its analogs OH HO HO O Dopamine (DA) H N N H Uric acid (UA) Phenethylamine (PEA) NH2 O N H NH O Norepinephrine (NE) OH HO H O HO Ascorbic acid (AA) Figure S9. Molecular structures of dopamine (DA) and dopamine analogues. OH HO O OH Epinephrine (EP) Tyrosine (TR) H N 1110. DA sensor using back gate system (a) Source (PANI:CSA) Graphene Silicon oxide Silicon back gate (b) Pt_rGO Drain (PANI:CSA) I / I0 (%) 15 12 0 3 6 9 Pt_rGO_5.0 DA 10 fM DA 100 aM DA 1 pM DA 100 pM DA 10 nM DA 1 M DA 100 M 0 100 200 Time (s) 300 400 Figure S10. (a) Schematic diagram of DA sensor device using backgate system. (b) DA sensing test with back gating DA sensor device. 12 13 Table S1. Comparison of the Pt_rGOs modified dopamine sensor with other electrochemical detection Modified materials   Interferents   Response time (s)   Linear range (mol∙L1)   Detection limit (mol∙L1)   References                        MWNT NafionTyra  EP  < 20 s  5x106 – 2.3x105 mol·L1  5.2 x 106 mol·L1   2  TyrABDDb  AA  < 10 s  5x106 – 1.2x104 mol·L1  5 x 106 mol∙L1  3  Tyr–SWNTsPpyc  AA  < 5 s  5x106 – 5x105 mol·L1  5 x 106 mol∙L1  4  TyrChit/CFd  SE, EP, NE  < 8 s  5x108 – 1.2x104 mol·L1  1.4 x 107 mol·L1  5  GO/SiO2 MIPse  NE,EP,AA,UA    5x108 – 1.6x104 mol·L1  3.0 x 108 mol·L1  6  Nafion modified Au/GCNEf      2x108 – 5.6x106 mol·L1  1.0 x 108 mol·L1  7  Graphene/Pt modified GCg  AA,UA  < 1 s  3x108 – 8.13x106 mol·L1  3.0 x 108 mol·L1  8  Pd3Pt1/PDDA RGOh  AA,UA    4x106 – 4x104 mol·L1  4.0 x 108 mol·L1  9  Pt_rGO  NE,EP,AA,UA, TR, PEA  < 1 s  1x1012 – 1x104 mol·L1  1 x 1016 mol·L1  This work                        a Multiwalled carbon nanotubesnafiontyrosinase b Tyrosinaseamine terminated active borondoped diamond c Tyrosinasesingle walled carbon nanotube d Tyrosinasechitosan/carbon fiber e GO/SiO2molecularly imprinted polymers f Nafionmodified Au/glass capillary nanoelectrode ggraphene/Ptmodified glassy carbon electrode hPd–Pt bimetallic nanoparticles anchored on functionalized reduced graphene oxide electrode SE, serotonin GC, glassy carbon RGO, reduced graphene oxide PDDA, poly(diallyldimethylammonium chloride) The measurement methods are amperometry for all. 