Fig. 1. Schematic layout of a CNT transistor (a) and a P3HT-FET (b). (c) Flow chamber setup for the measurements in aqueous solutions.

Fig. 2. (a) On/off switching behavior of a CNT-FET (upper graph) and a P3HT-FET (lower graph) in DI water. Rise- and fall time of the CNT transistor (b) and the P3HT transistor (c) taken from the online measurements in panel (a).

Fig. 3. (a) Online measurement with fixed gate and drain voltages with alternating analyte pH, starting from pH 3.4. Response upon pH switching of the CNT-FET (b) and the P3HT-FET (c) extracted from the curves in panel (a). The gray shaded area marks the buffer-exchange time.

Fig. 4. Panel (a) shows the electrolyte-gated device architecture. Negative ions in the electrolyte are causing additional holes in the channel, leading to a larger current for high pH values, whereas less current is observed for back-gated configurations (b).

Fig. 5. (a) Drain current extrated from the transfer cuves at VG= − 0.6 V. (b) Normalized drain currents from the marked regions #2, #4 and #6 for both CNTs and P3HT devices.

Fig. 6. Transfer curves measured in buffers with different pH for CNTs (a) and P3HT (b) from sweep #6.

As compared to the dry processing, the solution-processing of organic materials is an attractive alternate for mass fabrication of the sensors at low cost [173]. Among different solution-based processes, the spin coating technique (Fig. 11b) had been widely utilized in sensor fabrication including the P3HT-based EGOGET [195,196]. The disadvantages of spin-coating are the requirement of solution-based precursors and the subsequent annealing or sintering which is required to cure the polymer.

Cookies are used by this site.Cookie Settings

All content on this site: Copyright ©2025or its licensors and contributors. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. For all open access content, the relevant licensing terms apply.

These cookies are necessary for the website to function and cannot be switched off in our systems. They are usually only set in response to actions made by you which amount to a request for services, such as setting your privacy preferences, logging in or filling in forms. You can set your browser to block or alert you about these cookies, but some parts of the site will not then work. These cookies do not store any personally identifiable information.

These cookies enable the website to provide enhanced functionality and personalisation. They may be set by us or by third party providers whose services we have added to our pages. If you do not allow these cookies then some or all of these services may not function properly.

These cookies allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors move around the site.

These cookies may be set through our site by our advertising partners. They may be used by those companies to build a profile of your interests and show you relevant adverts on other sites. If you do not allow these cookies, you will experience less targeted advertising.

Outline

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbagen.2013.01.023Get rights and content

Full text access

Nowadays, there is a tremendous need for cheap disposable sensing devices for medical applications. Materials such as Carbon Nanotubes (CNTs) and regioregular P3HT are proven to offer a huge potential as cost-effective and solution processable semiconductors for (bio)sensing applications.

CNT-based field-effect transistors (CNT-FETs) as well as regioregular P3HT-based ones (P3HT-FETs) are fabricated and operated in the so-called electrolyte-gated configuration. The active layer of the P3HT-FETs consists of a spin-coated regioregular P3HT layer, which serves on one hand as the active sensing element and on the other hand as passivation layer for the transistor's metal contacts. The active layer of the nanotube transistors consists of a randomly distributed single walled CNT-network (>90% semiconducting tubes) deposited from a CNT-ink solution by spin-coating.

We compare both devices concerning their stability in aqueous environment and their response when exposed to buffers with different pH. We found that even if P3HT shows lower stability its pH sensitivity is reproducible even after long-term measurements.

CNT-FETs and P3HT-FETs offer different advantages and drawbacks concerning their stability in solution and the ease of fabrication. A discussion of their different sensing mechanisms as well as sensitivity is given here.

This work reports on fast and cost-effective production of solution processable thin-film transistors based on carbon nanotubes and regioregular P3HT and demonstrates their suitability as reliable pH sensors. This article is part of a Special Issue entitled Organic Bioelectronics — Novel Applications in Biomedicine.

► The performance of P3HT-FETs and CNT-FETs as pH sensors operated in an electrolyte gate mode was compared. ► The sensing mechanism was discussed for both devices. ► The stability in long-term measurements was discussed for both devices.

In the past years solution processable semiconductors attracted more and more attention in research all over the world ([1]and references therein). This is motivated by the growing need of cost-effective, flexible, disposable sensors which can be incorporated in everyday life as well as in research and in medical flash tests. Several materials and sensing applications have been proposed but it keeps still challenging to develop devices that are on one hand cheap and easy to produce but on the other hand provide a reliable sensing response. Here we are analyzing the device performance and pH sensitivity of two solution-processable semiconducting materials namely carbon nanotube (CNT) networks and regioregular poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT). Those materials are intrinsically very different. As CNTs are one dimensional, rigid, nano-scale objects, P3HT is a soluble π-conjugated polymer. Especially CNTs have been successfully proven as reliable sensing components for various analytes ranging from chemical compounds, cell activities to DNA and proteins[2],[3],[4],[5]. However the nanotubes incorporated in those devices are mostly grown by chemical vapor deposition techniques, which render them unsuitable for the production of flexible electronics unless further processing steps are included. In other publications we proposed a way of reliably fabricating CNT devices by means of solution-based deposition technologies such as spray-coating and spin-coating and we report on their function as gas sensors (a detailed discussion can be found in the references[6],[7]). Lately also P3HT, which is mainly known for its applicability as component in organic solar cells, in combination with lipid membranes was introduced by the group of Torsi as a versatile biosensor[8],[9]. Previously, we also reported on the pH sensitivity of both bottom-gated P3HT-based OTFTs[10]and impedimetric devices[11].

In this report we particularly compare the performance of P3HT-FETs and CNT-FETs as pH sensors operated in an electrolyte gate mode via custom-made Ag/AgCl electrodes. This operation mode allows extremely low operation voltages of the devices due to the high coupling capacitance at the interface between the active material and the electrolytic solutions, which renders gating very effective. We found that even if P3HT-FETs reveal much lower stability in liquid environment than CNT-FETs, they perform well and reliably as pH sensors. Indeed, the instability of P3HT-based devices and of other organic semiconductors is often discussed in literature and partially attributed to extrinsic factors such as trapping effects when exposed to moisture, oxygen and UV light[12],[13]. However, the well-known issue of baseline drift in organic thin film transistors has also some intrinsic sources, which are mainly electrical instability due to shallow and deep trap states at the interfaces or in the bulk ([14],[15]and references therein). There are already different attempts to overcome these problems as for example Yang et al. also proposed a pulsed gate sensing operation mode with a minimized duty cycle to overcome that issue[16]. However, in this report we will stick to conventional gating methods and show that these problems can be circumvented by a more differentiated data analysis, which leads to a reliable P3HT-FET operation for pH sensing applications and renders device production as time- and cost-effective as possible.

P3HT field-effect transistors were fabricated starting from p-doped silicon substrates with thermally grown SiO2(65 nm). Source and drain electrodes (5 nm Cr, 40 nm Au) have been evaporated on Si/SiO2substrates using standard optical lithography techniques. 1 wt.% regioregular P3HT (Rieke Metals) was dissolved in dichlorbenzene (DCB) (anhydrous, VWR) in a glove box (N2) and spin-coated (1000 rpm, 90 s) onto the interdigitated (W/L = 900 with a channel length of 50 μm) transistor structures using a 200 nm polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) filter (VWR). Substrates are usually reused after removing P3HT in a DCB bath during ultrasonication.

CNT-FETs were equivalently fabricated also using a spin-coater for thin film deposition. Prior to that a commercially available CNT powder, purchased from SWeNT (SG65, chirality 6.5 (> 50%) and > 90% semiconducting tubes) was dispersed (0.05 wt.%) in deionized water with 1 wt.% carboxymethyl cellulose (CMC)[17]. Dispersion of the nanotubes was enhanced by sonication for 20 min with a horn sonicator (Branson Digital Sonifier 450). The dispersion was then centrifuged to separate the sediment from the well dispersed CNTs, which were finally spin-coated (3000 rpm for 50 s) on the IDE structured substrate. Directly prior deposition of the nanotube film the substrates were exposed to oxygen plasma (30 s) to guarantee a homogenous film formation on the hydrophobic silicon oxide underneath layer. After the CNT deposition the substrates were immersed overnight (> 12 h) in diluted nitric acid (68% HNO3:H2O = 1:4) solutions to remove the CMC followed by rinsing with water and drying on a hotplate. Subsequently the carbon nanotube network was etched away by another oxygen plasma treatment everywhere on the chip except for the active area on the IDE structure to prevent the occurrence of parasitic currents. To avoid direct contact of the source and drain electrodes with aqueous solutions we covered those with a photo resist (AZ 4562, Clariant GmbH) by another optical lithography step.

Ag/AgCl electrodes were custom-made by immersing two silver wires in 3 M KCl solution and impinging a constant current (250 μA) for about 1 h. This method allows the incorporation of small Ag/AgCl electrodes into a flow chamber system. Sketches of the measurement system and the CNTs and P3HT devices are shown inFig. 1.Download:Download high-res image (393KB)Download:Download full-size imageFig. 1. Schematic layout of a CNT transistor (a) and a P3HT-FET (b). (c) Flow chamber setup for the measurements in aqueous solutions.

To characterize the transistors performance in liquid environment the devices were mounted in a flow chamber made out of poly(methyl methacrylate) and sealed with PDMS (polydimethylsiloxane) (Fig. 1). The liquid compartment (100 μl) was filled with deionized (DI) water (our deionized water is classified with a resistivity of 18.2 MΩ cm) and the drain voltage was kept constant at − 0.1 V while the voltage applied at the Ag/AgCl gate electrode was switched between 0 V and − 0.6 V. For online pH measurements gate and drain voltages were fixed at − 0.4 V. The inlet of the chamber was connected to two syringe pumps (NE-1000, New Era Pump Systems, Inc.). Those pumps were programmed in a way that solutions were injected alternatingly, starting from injection of buffer 1 (pH 3.4) for 90 s, followed from a five minutes pump break before flushing the chamber with buffer 2 (pH 7.8) for again 90 s, and so on. The volume to flush the flow chamber was chosen to be 3 ml to ensure complete buffer exchange. For all transient measurements a Keithley (2636 SYSTEM) source meter was used.

Transfer curves were recorded using a Keithley 4200-SCS. For the ease of measurements a PDMS compartment was used instead of a flow chamber to serve as a volume for 100 μl buffer. Solutions were then exchanged manually using a pipette. Those curves were recorded at fixed drain voltage (− 0.1 V) while sweeping the gate voltage from 0.6 V to − 0.6 V. All buffers were adjusted to an ionic strength of 10 mM with KCl, while the pH was alternated with a 1 mM citric acid/Na2HPO4buffer (Sigma Aldrich).

Both devices have been exposed to DI water as described above. A constant drain bias of − 0.1 V was applied while the gate voltage was switched between 0 V to − 0.6 V keeping each voltage fixed for a period of 4 min. Not only that the on-current of CNTs is much higher (while having similar off-currents of a few hundred nAs) than that of P3HT but also that P3HT shows a much higher exponential decrease in current (please, note the geometrical dimensions of the transistors are kept the same). The current decrease in transient curves which obviously also occurs in CNT devices was studied among others from Lin et al. They attributed this phenomenon to adsorption of molecules from the ambient on the device because this effect seems not to occur in vacuum[18].

We also observe effects of bias stress for both devices, which are much higher for the P3HT-devices. In about 40 min the P3HT drain current sinks from about 15 μA to 800 nA whereas the current from the nanotube device decreases about 50% and still shows high drain currents after a long measurement period. For the nanotubes as well as for P3HT the current at zero gate bias stabilizes after 10 min of operation.

From both transient curves we extracted the rise- and fall-time of the second peak around t = 14 min (marked with a red star). We defined the rise (fall) time as the increase (decrease) in current between 10% and 90% from the lower plateau level (minimum current during off-state) to the maximum of their on-state (plateau level). We found that both transistors show similar rise and fall times of a few seconds and several hundred milliseconds (Fig. 2. (b) and (c)). Both devices reveal a similar off-current of a few hundred nA, but the CNT-FETs on-current is five times larger. Extrapolating the slope of a linear fit between the 10% and 90% points of the curves gives a relatively faster response of the nanotube transistors. This is in agreement with the higher mobility of holes in the carbon nanotubes compared with polymeric semiconductors[6],[19]. We note that the response times extracted do not give the maximum performance of the used semiconductors but serve as a comparison. For instance, the group of Bao found rise- and fall-times for P3HT-devices gated with platinum in water of about 50 ms to 10 ms[20]and Laiho et al. extracted switching times of 1.9 ms (on) and 0.4 ms (off)[21].Download:Download high-res image (508KB)Download:Download full-size imageFig. 2. (a) On/off switching behavior of a CNT-FET (upper graph) and a P3HT-FET (lower graph) in DI water. Rise- and fall time of the CNT transistor (b) and the P3HT transistor (c) taken from the online measurements in panel (a).

For polymeric transistors in back-gate configuration Street et al. reported[22]that the current-decay in transient measurements is gate-bias dependent. They showed evidence that this degradation is due to formation of bipolarons. Those effects are known to occur in some thiophenes and the group also suggests bipolaron formation in regioregular thiophenes although on larger time scales. The formation of bipolarons is dependent on the concentration of holes, which again is proportional to the channel depth and thus to the gate bias (for a detailed discussion we refer to their publications[22],[23]). We considered their observation for our pH switching experiments by fixing the gate and the drain voltage both at − 0.4 V. The results can be seen inFig. 3. It is obvious that degradation effects of P3HT are lower than in the transient measurement in the section above.Download:Download high-res image (431KB)Download:Download full-size imageFig. 3. (a) Online measurement with fixed gate and drain voltages with alternating analyte pH, starting from pH 3.4. Response upon pH switching of the CNT-FET (b) and the P3HT-FET (c) extracted from the curves in panel (a). The gray shaded area marks the buffer-exchange time.

Both devices are sensitive to a change of pH in the buffers in a way that the current increases with higher pH values. For carbon nanotubes this sensitivity is attributed to charging and discharging of defect states on the tubes surface which is discussed in more detail in another publication[24]. In our recently proposed impedimetric pH sensor based on solution-processable P3HT and carbon nanotubes[11], we could also show that the impedance for both materials is a suitable parameter for monitoring changes in pH value of PBS buffer-solutions and that this dependence is different for P3HT and CNTs. However, it is peculiar that we observed an opposite behavior using back-gated P3HT-devices, meaning that the drain current increases with increasing pH for electrolyte-gated OFETs and decreases with increasing pH for back-gated OFETs[10]. This is consistent with the effect caused by the ionic charges on the respective transistor channels. In fact, with increasing pH value the concentration of negative hydroxide ions in solution increases (OH−), hence these negative charges are inducing additional positive charges in the semiconductor on the interface to the electrolyte. For electrolyte-gated OTFTs the semiconducting channel finds itself directly at this interface, leading to higher drain currents for an increasing buffer pH. On the contrary, for back-gated operations the channel is at the oxide–semiconductor interface and as a result a lower pH leads to an increased positive charge in the channel and thus to an increasing drain current. In our case (architecture (a) shown inFig. 4), the P3HT layer is in direct contact with the solution. Thus, a positive charge at the electrolyte/P3HT interface will increase the positive charge in the channel. Roberts et al. also found the drain current to decrease with ascending pH for a back-gated DDFTTF field-effect transistor[25], while other groups using a dielectric layer on top of the semiconductor such as Bartic et al. found consistently the corresponding same behavior[26].Download:Download high-res image (357KB)Download:Download full-size imageFig. 4. Panel (a) shows the electrolyte-gated device architecture. Negative ions in the electrolyte are causing additional holes in the channel, leading to a larger current for high pH values, whereas less current is observed for back-gated configurations (b).

From the current traces inFig. 4the switching behavior of the transistors was extracted from the peak at t = 50 min (marked with a red star) and the results are shown in (b) for CNT-devices and in (c) for P3HT-ones. The gray shaded areas mark the time buffer-exchange takes place. Again the CNT transistor has longer rise- and fall-times but also reveals a stronger response and generally higher currents. It is eye-catching that after an initial equilibration time the current at high pH values reaches a plateau for P3HT but not for carbon nanotubes. This can indicate that a chemical equilibrium at high pH values cannot be reached during 5 min exposure time for the CNT device or could be attributed to the larger surface area of the carbon nanotube network at the solid/liquid interface.

To further investigate the pH sensitivity of our devices in electrolyte-gated mode we conducted transfer curve measurements as a second step.

For transfer curve analysis we exposed the active areas of our devices to citric acid buffer solutions with pH ranging from 3.4 to 7.8. After about 1 min equilibration time following buffer-exchange we applied a drain bias of − 0.1 V and swept the gate voltage between 0.6 V to − 0.6 V starting from positive voltages. For each pH we recorded one transfer curve. We started from pH 3.4, increased the pH and after arriving at pH 7.8 we decreased it again. This procedure was repeated until seven pH sweeps were recorded. The results for P3HT and CNTs can be seen inFig. 5. A strong decrease of current for a P3HT device can be observed, equivalent to the one inSection 3.1. InFig. 5(a) the drain current extracted from the transfer curves at VG= − 0.6 V is shown resulting in a zig-zag behavior of the current. All sweeps except for the first one show increasing drain current with increasing pH of the solution. In this first regime device degradation or equilibration with the aqueous environment seems to overlap the pH sensitivity of the transistors. After this initial equilibration the devices' pH sensitivity dominates the effects of degradation, even for ascending pH values the current increases clearly. For further analysis only the regions marked #2, #4 and #6 have been considered. The results can be seen inFig. 5(b). All data were normalized to the data point at pH 6 in each plot. A linear current response could be extracted for the P3HT-FET. Comparing the results for carbon nanotubes and P3HT in (a) and (b) we find that the CNT-FETs reveal higher currents and higher stability but do show a narrower linear pH region and a somehow lower reproducibility.Download:Download high-res image (256KB)Download:Download full-size imageFig. 5. (a) Drain current extrated from the transfer cuves at VG= − 0.6 V. (b) Normalized drain currents from the marked regions #2, #4 and #6 for both CNTs and P3HT devices.

InFig. 6we show the corresponding transfer curves from sweep #6. The red lines mark fits in the linear regime of the curves indicating that sensing occurs via shifts in the threshold voltage. For P3HT we observed a threshold shift of almost 28 mV/pH. Assuming a linear dependence for the nanotube device in the region from pH 3.4 to pH 6.9 we extracted a shift of ca. 27 mV/pH.Download:Download high-res image (327KB)Download:Download full-size imageFig. 6. Transfer curves measured in buffers with different pH for CNTs (a) and P3HT (b) from sweep #6.

The drain current of a field-effect transistor in the linear regime is described by the following equation:ID=μCWLVG−VTVD−VD22.

With the electrolyte coupling capacitance C, drain voltage VD, gate voltage VG, field-effect mobility μ and threshold voltage VT. We observe a pH dependent behavior of the threshold voltage and not a variation of the carrier mobility neither of the capacitance of the system, which would result in a pH dependent change of the transconductance of the curves. For α-sexithiophene Buth et al. attributed pH sensing rather to pH dependent surface charges on the polymer than to a change in device mobility[27]. This could also be the case for P3HT although other effects due to the polymeric interface cannot be excluded and still deserve further investigations. To ensure that the observed response is not an artifact of the custom-made miniaturized Ag/AgCl electrode we also conducted experiments with a commercially available Ag/AgCl electrode and no changes in the pH response could be observed. In carbon nanotube devices on the other side, adsorbants induced at the CNT-surface due to the acid treatment (described above) they have to undergo during the fabrication can be the origin of defect states, which get charged and discharged upon varying pH values.

In this report we discussed the suitability of electrolyte-gated CNT-FETs and P3HT-FETs as pH sensors. Both semiconductors, as they are solution processable, can be deposited on flexible substrates and used as cost-effective one-way disposable sensors in medical flash tests. Especially P3HT-FETs stand out due to the very fast fabrication process. No passivation of the gold contacts is required nor purification of the polymer itself. Eventually, as we did, also the substrates (in our case silicon) can be cleaned after measurements and reused. Even though the electrical stability of P3HT-devices is behind that of CNT transistors they perform well as pH sensors.

The authors thank theInternational Graduate School for Science and Engineering (IGSSE)at Technische Universität München (TUM) and theGerman Excellence Cluster “Nanosystems Initiative Munich” (NIM)for funding.

Polymers and organic materials-based pH sensors for healthcare applications2018, Progress in Materials ScienceCitation Excerpt :As compared to the dry processing, the solution-processing of organic materials is an attractive alternate for mass fabrication of the sensors at low cost [173]. Among different solution-based processes, the spin coating technique (Fig. 11b) had been widely utilized in sensor fabrication including the P3HT-based EGOGET [195,196]. The disadvantages of spin-coating are the requirement of solution-based precursors and the subsequent annealing or sintering which is required to cure the polymer.Show abstractIn this review, we discuss chemical, physical and electrochemical properties of pH-sensitive polymers and organic materials and their sensing mechanisms for healthcare applications. We find that polymers and organic materials, due to their biocompatibility and customizable electrical and electrochemical properties, can be used in pH sensors as structural, pH-sensitive, and passivation materials. To do so, we first identify the properties and sensing mechanisms for pH-sensitive polymers and organic materials. Different functional groups in the materials determine their chemical properties and are involved in redox reactions for chemical sensing of pH. The transport of charge carriers in the polymers and organic materials is influenced by pH-induced electrical field change, which is responsible for physical sensing of pH. Some polymers and organic materials also show hybrid sensing properties, where both functional groups and electrical field-effect contribute to their pH response. Next, we review fabrication technologies for polymers and organic materials, and identify that engineering the materials and new device structures are two possible approaches to improve the sensitivity and reliability of pH sensing devices. We propose that miniaturized sensors can provide enhanced functionality of the sensing materials in constrained spaces. Finally, we present an overview of biocompatible polymers and organic materials for monitoring of pH and pH-related analytes in biological fluids, and for pH-change-triggered drug delivery.Carbon nanotube chemiresistor for wireless pH sensing2014, Scientific ReportsShow abstractThe ability to accurately measure real-time pH fluctuationsin-vivocould be highly advantageous. Early detection and potential prevention of bacteria colonization of surgical implants can be accomplished by monitoring associated acidosis. However, conventional glass membrane or ion-selective field-effect transistor (ISFET) pH sensing technologies both require a reference electrode which may suffer from leakage of electrolytes and potential contamination. Herein, we describe a solid-state sensor based on oxidized single-walled carbon nanotubes (ox-SWNTs) functionalized with the conductive polymer poly(1-aminoanthracene) (PAA). This device had a Nernstian response over a wide pH range (2–12) and retained sensitivity over 120 days. The sensor was also attached to a passively-powered radio-frequency identification (RFID) tag which transmits pH data through simulated skin. This battery-less, reference electrode free, wirelessly transmitting sensor platform shows potential for biomedical applications as an implantable sensor, adjacent to surgical implants detecting for infection.Carbon nanomaterials: Synthesis, functionalization and sensing applications2021, NanomaterialsMicrofabricated electrochemical pH and free chlorine sensors for water quality monitoring: Recent advances and research challenges2015, RSC AdvancesCharacterization and simulation of electrolyte-gated organic field-effect transistors2014, Faraday DiscussionsElectrical and electrochemical sensors based on carbon nanotubes for the monitoring of chemicals in water—a review2022, SensorsView all citing articles on Scopus

Polymers and organic materials-based pH sensors for healthcare applications2018, Progress in Materials ScienceCitation Excerpt :As compared to the dry processing, the solution-processing of organic materials is an attractive alternate for mass fabrication of the sensors at low cost [173]. Among different solution-based processes, the spin coating technique (Fig. 11b) had been widely utilized in sensor fabrication including the P3HT-based EGOGET [195,196]. The disadvantages of spin-coating are the requirement of solution-based precursors and the subsequent annealing or sintering which is required to cure the polymer.

Citation Excerpt :As compared to the dry processing, the solution-processing of organic materials is an attractive alternate for mass fabrication of the sensors at low cost [173]. Among different solution-based processes, the spin coating technique (Fig. 11b) had been widely utilized in sensor fabrication including the P3HT-based EGOGET [195,196]. The disadvantages of spin-coating are the requirement of solution-based precursors and the subsequent annealing or sintering which is required to cure the polymer.

In this review, we discuss chemical, physical and electrochemical properties of pH-sensitive polymers and organic materials and their sensing mechanisms for healthcare applications. We find that polymers and organic materials, due to their biocompatibility and customizable electrical and electrochemical properties, can be used in pH sensors as structural, pH-sensitive, and passivation materials. To do so, we first identify the properties and sensing mechanisms for pH-sensitive polymers and organic materials. Different functional groups in the materials determine their chemical properties and are involved in redox reactions for chemical sensing of pH. The transport of charge carriers in the polymers and organic materials is influenced by pH-induced electrical field change, which is responsible for physical sensing of pH. Some polymers and organic materials also show hybrid sensing properties, where both functional groups and electrical field-effect contribute to their pH response. Next, we review fabrication technologies for polymers and organic materials, and identify that engineering the materials and new device structures are two possible approaches to improve the sensitivity and reliability of pH sensing devices. We propose that miniaturized sensors can provide enhanced functionality of the sensing materials in constrained spaces. Finally, we present an overview of biocompatible polymers and organic materials for monitoring of pH and pH-related analytes in biological fluids, and for pH-change-triggered drug delivery.

Carbon nanotube chemiresistor for wireless pH sensing2014, Scientific Reports

The ability to accurately measure real-time pH fluctuationsin-vivocould be highly advantageous. Early detection and potential prevention of bacteria colonization of surgical implants can be accomplished by monitoring associated acidosis. However, conventional glass membrane or ion-selective field-effect transistor (ISFET) pH sensing technologies both require a reference electrode which may suffer from leakage of electrolytes and potential contamination. Herein, we describe a solid-state sensor based on oxidized single-walled carbon nanotubes (ox-SWNTs) functionalized with the conductive polymer poly(1-aminoanthracene) (PAA). This device had a Nernstian response over a wide pH range (2–12) and retained sensitivity over 120 days. The sensor was also attached to a passively-powered radio-frequency identification (RFID) tag which transmits pH data through simulated skin. This battery-less, reference electrode free, wirelessly transmitting sensor platform shows potential for biomedical applications as an implantable sensor, adjacent to surgical implants detecting for infection.

Carbon nanomaterials: Synthesis, functionalization and sensing applications2021, Nanomaterials

Microfabricated electrochemical pH and free chlorine sensors for water quality monitoring: Recent advances and research challenges2015, RSC Advances

Characterization and simulation of electrolyte-gated organic field-effect transistors2014, Faraday Discussions

Electrical and electrochemical sensors based on carbon nanotubes for the monitoring of chemicals in water—a review2022, Sensors

This article is part of a Special Issue entitled Organic Bioelectronics — Novel Applications in Biomedicine.

Organic Bioelectronics - Novel Applications in BiomedicineEdited byR.Owens,P.Kjäll,A.Richter-Dahlfors,F.CicoiraDownload full issue

Organic Bioelectronics - Novel Applications in BiomedicineEdited byR.Owens,P.Kjäll,A.Richter-Dahlfors,F.Cicoira

Edited byR.Owens,P.Kjäll,A.Richter-Dahlfors,F.Cicoira

No articles found.

View details