A highly sensitive FET-type aptasensor using flower-like MoS2 nanospheres for real-time detection of arsenic(iii)†	Check for updates
Ji Hyun An ORCID logo a  and  Jyongsik Jang ORCID logo *a  
 Author affiliations
Abstract
Arsenic (As) contamination in drinking water is problematic due to its threat to human health. Highly stable, sensitive and selective sensors are needed for As(III), which is the most toxic of the various forms of arsenic. Herein, we describe the fabrication of field-effect transistor (FET)-type aptasensors for As(III) detection that is based on carboxylic polypyrrole (CPPy)-coated flower-like MoS2 nanospheres (CFMNSs). Arsenic-binding aptamer-conjugated CFMNSs were integrated into a liquid-ion gated FET system, leading to extraordinary performance with a rapid response (on a time scale of less than 1 s). Field-induced current changes occurred through the interaction between the aptamer and As(III), resulting in sensitive discrimination of As(III) at unprecedentedly low concentrations (ca. 1 pM). Moreover, the CFMNS-based aptasensor selectively recognized As(III) among numerous other metal ions and accurately detected As(III) in a mixed solution. The FET aptasensor could also discriminate target analytes in a real sample derived from river water. This MoS2-based aptasensor is a promising tool for the detection of As(III) and could be used in a wide range of practical applications.

Graphical abstract: A highly sensitive FET-type aptasensor using flower-like MoS2 nanospheres for real-time detection of arsenic(iii)
1. Introduction
Arsenic (As) contamination in drinking water is becoming a serious problem in many countries due to its threat to human health.1 Elevated arsenic levels can lead to skin damage, keratosis, heart disease, and circulatory system problems.2,3 Moreover, many fatal cancers (e.g., skin, lung, bladder, kidney, and liver) are caused by drinking water containing arsenic.4 Therefore, the World Health Organization (WHO) recommends that the limit of arsenic in drinking water be below 10 ppb (133 nM, 10 μg L−1).5 Arsenite (As(iii)) and arsenate (As(v)) are the two most common forms of arsenic found in water. Arsenite(iii) is the most toxic form and is 60 times more harmful than As(v).6 Considerable efforts have been made to develop innovative receptors for detecting As(iii). Some receptors such as gold nanoparticles, Escherichia coli cells, and laccase have been developed to recognize As(iii).7–10 However, difficult modifications and reactions are required to use these receptors, resulting in their limited application. Additionally, these materials feature a relatively low sensitivity and poor selectivity for detecting As(iii). Therefore, there is a great need to develop highly stable, sensitive and selective receptors for As(iii) sensors.

Aptamers have attracted much attention due to their ability to interact distinctly with targets. Aptamers consist of artificial single-stranded RNA or DNA oligonucleotides. Various aptamer-functionalized biosensors have been developed for diverse analytes.11–15 The arsenic-binding aptamer (named Ars-3) synthesized by Kim et al. has a high affinity to As(iii).16 Some strategies have been proposed to selectively detect As(iii) using Ars-3.17–20 However, real-time detection for As(iii) remains a challenge; strategies to date have suffered from slow responses and are time-consuming.

Among the sensing methods, transistor-based sensors are attractive candidates due to their ability to rapidly and sensitively detect analytes via efficient interfacial transfer of charge carriers.21–23 Various materials can be applied to transducers in liquid-ion gated field-effect transistor (FET) geometry operated in the solution state through the gate dielectric.24–26 Liquid-ion gated FET biosensors have demonstrated rapid responses with low-voltage operation and improved signal transduction, leading to high sensing performance as well as real-time detection.27–29

Recently, there has been much interest in using transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) for sensor applications due to their electron- and proton-accepting behavior, notably molybdenum disulfide (MoS2), which is a layered TMD, has a large surface-to-volume ratio, good carrier mobility, and a low noise level.30,31 Gas sensors using MoS2 transducers have been studied extensively due to their impressive performance with low power consumption.32–35 However, relatively little research has been conducted using MoS2 transducers for biosensors, although some MoS2-based biosensors for proteins or DNA have been reported.36,37

Conducting polymers (CPs) have high conductivity originating from a unique π-conjugated electronic system. The polymer backbones of CPs provide a superb pathway for charge flow during electrochemical processes.38 Moreover, the functional groups of CPs play a pivotal role in engineering surface modifications. Some transducers combined with CPs have advanced sensing ability.39,40

Herein, we present a new route toward the fabrication of MoS2-based aptasensors for arsenic detection. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first demonstration of a FET-type arsenic sensor. First, three-dimensional (3D) flower-like MoS2 nanospheres (FMNSs) were synthesized via a simple hydrothermal method. Then, carboxylated polypyrrole (CPPy)-coated FMNSs (CFMNSs) were formed by vapor deposition and were conjugated with Ars-3 (Apt-CFMNSs). Consequently, liquid-ion gated FET systems using Apt-CFMNSs as the transducer were successfully prepared. The FET-type aptasensor had a fast response time of <1 s, sufficient for real-time detection of As(iii). Field-induced changes occurred sensitively through the interaction between the aptamer and As(iii), resulting in an improved detection limit of 1 pM, which is two- to four orders of magnitude more sensitive than that of previous sensors based on electrochemical methods.19,41–43 The MoS2-based aptasensor interacted selectively with As(iii) among numerous metals and discriminated As(iii) in a mixed solution. Moreover, this FET system could detect As(iii) in real samples derived from river water, providing significant possibilities for practical applications.

2. Experimental section
2.1 Materials
(NH4)2MoS4, N2H4·H2O, As2O3, and NaOH were obtained from the Aldrich Chemical Company. As(iii) solution was prepared by dissolving As2O3 in NaOH solution. Pyrrole (98%) monomer, pyrrole-3-carboxylic acid, and FeCl3 were also purchased from the Aldrich Chemical Company. The Ars-3 aptamer was purchased from Bioneer Co. (Daejeon, Korea). Its sequence is 5′-amine-GGTAATACGACTCACTATAGGGAGATACCAGCTTATTCAATTTTACAGAACAACCAACGTCGCTCCGGGTACTTCTTCATCGAGATAGTAAGTGCAATCT-3′.

2.2 Instrumentation
Field-emission scanning electron microscopy (FE-SEM) (JEOL, JSM-6700F), transmission electron microscopy (TEM) (JEOL, JEM-200CX) and high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HR-TEM) (JEOL, JEM-3010) were used to visualize the material morphologies. X-ray diffraction (XRD) and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) spectra were acquired using an M18XHF SRA (MAC Science Co.) and an AXIS-His (Kratos). FTIR data were obtained using a Spectra 400 (PerkinElmer). A spectrophotometer (Thermo Scientific, model NanoDrop 2000/2000c) was used to determine the concentration of the immobilized aptamer. Zeta-potential measurements were obtained using an electrophoretic light scattering spectrophotometer (Otsuka, ELS-8000).

2.3 Sensing measurements
All electrical performances were measured with a Keithley 2612A semiconductor analyzer and probe station (MS TECH, Model 4000). To perform solution-based measurements, a glass chamber (200 μL volume) was designed and utilized. 10 mM aqueous phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) (100 μL) was poured into the glass chamber. The PBS solution was used as a liquid electrolyte. A micro-pipette (Eppendorf Research plus) was utilized to inject the analyte solution into the PBS. All real-time responses were measured at Vsd = −50 mV (Vg = −5 mV, a low operating voltage). Electrical current change was normalized and defined as ΔI/I0 = (I − I0)/I0, where I0 is the original current and I is the detected real-time current.

2.4 Fabrication of FMNSs
Flower-like nanospheres were synthesized by a hydrothermal method, as reported previously, with modification.44 First, (NH4)2MoS4 powder (0.165 g) was dissolved in deionized water (72 mL) with vigorous stirring and bath sonication to prepare a homogeneous solution. Then, N2H4·H2O (1.125 mL) was added to the aforementioned solution with sonication for 30 min. After that, the as-prepared solution was transferred into a 150 mL Teflon-lined stainless steel autoclave and treated at 200 °C for 12 h. The autoclave reactor was allowed to naturally cool down to room temperature. The black product was obtained by centrifugation, washed several times with deionized water and ethanol, and then dried for 12 h at 60 °C. Finally, the black powder was placed in a vacuum furnace and heated in flowing argon gas at 600 °C and a flow rate of 300 sccm for 1 h. After the annealing process, FMNSs were obtained.

2.5 Fabrication of CFMNSs
CFMNSs were fabricated by the vapor deposition polymerization (VDP) method. The above-prepared FMNSs were immersed into 0.1 M ethanolic ferric chloride (FeCl3) solution for 10 min. The immersed FMNSs were dried in an oven under vacuum and moved into a reactor. Subsequently, the liquid monomer (0.18 mmol pyrrole-3-carboxylic acid) was injected into the reactor when the internal pressure was reduced to 0.1 Torr. Chemical oxidation polymerization was achieved after placing the reactor in an electric oven at 100 °C for 15 min. This provided a coating of CPPy on the FMNS surface.

2.6 Fabrication of FET-type aptasensor
To build the FET-type aptasensor configuration, an interdigitated array (IDA) substrate was dipped in 3 wt% aqueous 3-aminopropyltrimethoxysilane (APS) solution for 12 h. The amino-modified IDA was treated with a mixed solution of 5 wt% aqueous CFMNS solution (30 μL) and 1 wt% aqueous 4-(4,6-dimethoxy-1,3,5-triazin-2-yl)-4-methylmorpholinium chloride (DMT-MM) solution (20 μL) over 12 h. The CFMNS-immobilized substrate was washed with distilled water. To introduce the arsenic-binding aptamer on the surface of the CFMNSs, the modified substrate was exposed to a mixture of 1 μM aptamer solution (40 μL) and 1 wt% aqueous DMT-MM solution (10 μL) for 6 h. Finally, the aptasensor was rinsed with distilled water, and then dried at room temperature.

3. Results and discussion
3.1 Fabrication of carboxylated polypyrrole-coated FMNSs
The conducting polymer-coated MoS2 nanospheres were fabricated using hydrothermal, annealing and vapor deposition polymerization (VDP) processes. Scheme 1 shows the schematic illustration of the overall procedure. First, self-assembled nanospheres (NSs) were prepared by a simple hydrothermal method. XRD measurement showed the absence of the (002) diffraction peak, which indicated that the NSs had poor crystallinity along the c-axis (Fig. S1a†). Annealing at 600 °C for 1 h formed highly ordered 3D FMNSs along the (002) direction (Fig. S1c†). The flower-like nanostructure provided a high surface area with numerous potential reaction sites. In addition, the (100) and (110) peaks were stronger and sharper after the annealing process, signifying enhanced crystallinity. Subsequently, the FMNSs were exposed to FeCl3 solution to introduce ferric cations (Fe3+) as an initiator for the VDP process. The Fe3+ ions were immobilized on the surface of the FMNSs through charge–charge interactions between Fe3+ ions and the negatively charged NSs. The surface charge of the FMNSs was confirmed by electrophoretic light scattering spectrophotometry (Table S1†). To induce polymerization via chemical oxidation, carboxylated pyrrole monomers were vaporized in a vacuum oven. Polymerization of the monomers proceeded on the FMNS surface, with the adsorbed Fe3+ ions as an oxidant, to form the CFMNSs.


Scheme 1 Schematic diagram of the fabrication steps for flower-like MoS2 nanospheres coated with carboxylated polypyrrole.
3.2 Characterization of FMNSs
The as-prepared FMNSs were examined by FE-SEM (Fig. 1a). The FMNSs present a spherical shape with diameters ranging from ca. 70 to 120 nm. The TEM image clearly reveals the 3D flower-like nanostructure of the FMNSs (Fig. 1b). Fig. 1c displays the HR-TEM image of the FMNS, which shows the d-spacing between adjacent MoS2 single layers. This spacing is ca. 0.64 nm, which corresponds to the (002) interlayer spacing of MoS2.45 Selected area electron diffraction (SAED) was used to further analyze the structure of the FMNSs. The SAED pattern (inset of Fig. 1c) represents the (100), (103), (110), and (002) planes, indicating that the FMNSs have a hexagonal structure.46


Fig. 1 (a) FE-SEM micrograph of FMNSs. (b) TEM and (c) HR-TEM images of FMNS; the inset of (c) presents an SAED diffraction pattern. (d) XRD pattern of FMNSs. XPS spectra of (e) the Mo 3d region and (f) the S 2p region of FMNSs.
The crystallinity and structure of the FMNSs were determined by XRD analysis. As shown in Fig. 1d, the diffraction peaks corresponding to the (002), (100), (103), and (110) planes were in good agreement with those of the hexagonal MoS2 (JCPDS card no. 37-1492).46 This demonstrated that the obtained FMNSs were highly pure and had a hexagonal structure. Interestingly, the (002) plane peak of the FMNSs was much less intense than that of bulk MoS2 (Fig. S2†). This reduced intensity suggested that the stacking interaction between the MoS2 single layers had been prevented, resulting in the formation of few-layer MoS2.47

In order to study the chemical composition of Mo and S in the as-prepared FMNSs, XPS analysis was conducted (Fig. 1e and f). The Mo 3d feature displayed two peaks at 229.6 and 232.8 eV, which are associated with Mo 3d5/2 and Mo 3d3/2, respectively (Fig. 1e). In addition, two characteristic S peaks located at 162.5 and 163.6 eV were assigned to S 2p3/2 and S 2p1/2, respectively (Fig. 1f).45

3.3 Characterization of CFMNSs
CPs can be effective signal transducers due to their high conductivity. The π-conjugated electronic system of CPs can lead to excellent conductivity.48 The polymer backbone provides an outstanding pathway for the flow of electric charge during electrochemical reactions. Moreover, the functional groups of CPs play important roles in achieving surface modification.49 To utilize these attractive characteristics, CPPy, a high-performance CP, was introduced onto the as-prepared FMNSs. A CPPy layer was successfully coated on the surface of the FMNS via the VDP process. Fig. 2a shows an HR-TEM image of CPPy-coated FMNSs (CFMNSs), revealing a ca. 2 nm-thick coating layer on the surface. Additionally, there was no aggregation of CPPy despite the chemical oxidation polymerization, suggesting that the ferric cations were uniformly distributed on FMNS surfaces. Fig. 2b shows FT-IR spectra recorded before and after the introduction of the CPPy coating layer. The pristine FMNSs did not show distinctive peaks related to the pyrrole ring structure and the carbonyl functional group due to the absence of the CPPy. In contrast to the spectrum of the FMNSs, absorption bands appeared at 1551 and 1471 cm−1 in the FT-IR spectrum of the CFMNSs, corresponding to the C–C stretching and C–N stretching vibrations of the pyrrole ring, respectively. Furthermore, peaks at 1294 and 1187 cm−1 were assigned to the [double bond, length as m-dash]C–H in-plane vibration. The absorption band at 907 cm−1 corresponded to the [double bond, length as m-dash]C–H out-of-plane vibration. Moreover, the appearance of a peak at 1702 cm−1 (corresponding to the C[double bond, length as m-dash]O stretching vibration of the carboxylic acid) indicated the presence of the carbonyl functional group.40,50


Fig. 2 (a) HR-TEM image of CFMNS. (b) FT-IR and (c) XPS spectra of FMNSs (black line), and CFMNSs (red line). (d) Deconvoluted XPS N 1s spectrum of CFMNSs.
To further clarify the presence of the CPPy layer, the chemical composition of the FMNSs and CFMNSs was confirmed by XPS analysis. Fig. 2c shows the survey scan spectrum, which indicated the presence of Mo, S, C and O in both samples. Although the N 1s peak was present in the CFMNSs spectrum, there was no corresponding peak in the FMNS spectrum (Fig. 2c). The appearance of the N 1s peak was attributed to the nitrogen atoms of the CPPy, and implied that the CPPy coating on the FMNS surfaces was successfully applied. Fig. 2d displays the deconvoluted XPS N 1s spectrum of the CFMNs. The three deconvoluted XPS peaks originated from the N atoms of the pyrrole ring. The three peaks at 397.2, 399.5, and 401.2 eV correspond to imine-like nitrogen, neutral nitrogen, and positively charged pyrrolium nitrogen, respectively.51

3.4 Fabrication of Apt-CFMNS FET sensor electrode
Fig. 3 illustrates the synthetic procedures used to prepare the aptamer-immobilized CFMNSs on the electrode substrate. First, an interdigitated microelectrode array (IDA) was deposited on a glass substrate. The IDA substrate was composed of a pair of gold electrodes placed on the glass substrate. The gold electrodes, which were utilized as the source (S) and drain (D), had 25 fingers each and 2 μM interfinger gaps. This IDA substrate was used as an electrode for the FET-type sensor platform. To functionalize the IDA surfaces, the IDA substrate was treated with 3-aminopropyltrimethoxysilane (APS) containing the amino group. Subsequently, the CFMNSs were introduced onto the APS-functionalized IDA substrate. Then, the CFMNSs were successfully immobilized on the functionalized surface through a condensation reaction between the amino group (–NH2) placed on the substrate surface and the carboxyl group (–COOH) of the CFMNSs. Reaction with the condensing agent 4-(4,6-dimethoxy-1,3,5-triazin-2-yl)-4-methylmorpholinium (DMT-MM) resulted in the formation of chemically stable amide bonds (–CONH–).52 Similarly, Ars-3 aptamers were bound to the CFMNSs through covalent bonding. The interaction between the carboxyl group (–COOH) of the CFMNS and the amino group (–NH2) at the 5′ terminus of the binding aptamer formed covalent bonds, resulting in the Ars-3 aptamer-conjugated CFMNS (Apt-CFMNS). Spectrophotometric measurements were carried out to quantify the immobilized aptamer on the FMNSs and CFMNSs (Fig. S3†). The results showed that ca. 90% of the aptamers remained on the CFMNSs after the washing process. Although the delocalized electrons of MoS2 outer layers could lead to π–π stacking interactions with the nucleotide base of the aptamer,53 only ca. 50% of the aptamers were immobilized on the washed FMNSs. Compared with the FMNSs, excellent immobilization on the CFMNSs was achieved due to strong, stable covalent bonding. Consequently, an FET-type aptasensor system based on the Apt-CFMNS was successfully fabricated on the IDA electrode.


Fig. 3 Schematic illustrations for the immobilization procedure of aptamer-conjugated CFMNSs (Apt-CFMNSs) on the electrode. ‘S’ and ‘D’ indicate source and drain electrodes, respectively.
3.5 Electrical characterization of Apt-CFMNS FET sensors
To investigate the electrical characteristics of the FET-type sensor platform, current–voltage (I–V) curves were observed. The dI/dV value of the CFMNS electrode was several orders of magnitude higher than that of the FMNS electrode, which implied that the CPPy coating on the FMNS surfaces provided greatly enhanced conductivity. In addition, the CPPy layer transformed the non-linear curve of the FMNS into the linear curve of the CFMNS (Fig. S4†). Fig. 4a depicts the I–V curves for the sensor electrodes using CFMNSs and Apt-CFMNSs as transducer materials. The curves indicate the electrical changes before and after the attachment of the binding aptamers. The I–V relationship remained linear over a voltage range from −1 to 1 V, although the dI/dV value decreased slightly after aptamer immobilization due to a moderately increased resistance. To conduct the aptamer immobilization, the CFMNSs were interacted with a mixture of aptamer and DMT-MM solution. The interaction formed Apt-CFMNSs via covalent bonding. Finally, the Apt-CFMNSs were rinsed with distilled water. The doped counterion (Cl−) in the CPPy layer may be physically detached from the CPPy backbone during the immobilization and washing processes, leading to reduced oxidation. The oxidation level can also be influenced by the aptamer and DMT-MM during the processes.54 The change of the oxidation level had effects on the decreased dI/dV value. However, the dI/dV values were almost maintained and slightly reduced, which indicated that the immobilization of aptamers on the CMFNSs was achieved without significant loss in electrical contact and conductivity. In addition, the linear property of the I–V relationship indicated stable ohmic behavior and that reliable electric contact was preserved. These results suggest that a conductive channel based on Apt-CFMNSs could maintain good electrical contact, and that the channel could provide an effective signal pathway for specific binding interactions.


Fig. 4 (a) Current–voltage (I–V) relations of the MoS2-based sensor before and after the introduction of aptamer. (b) Illustrative diagram of liquid-ion gated FET sensor using Apt-CFMNSs as transducers. (c) Output characteristics of the Apt-CFMNSs FET-type sensor under different gate voltages (Vg, 0.2 to −0.8 V in a step of −0.1 V, and Vsd, 0 to −0.14 V in a step of −10 mV).
A liquid-ion gated FET system was prepared to examine the possibility of using Apt-CFMNSs as transducers in the liquid-ion gated FET configuration. Fig. 4b shows the experimental setup of the FET system, which includes the Apt-CFMNSs as the conductive channel and gold electrodes as the source (S) and drain (D). The FET sensor is surrounded by phosphate-buffered saline (PBS; pH 7.4) as an electrolyte; a gate electrode is located in the electrolyte solution. Fig. 4c shows the output characteristics of the sensor under varying gate voltages (Vg) ranging from 0.2 to −0.8 V. The source-to-drain current (Isd) became more negative with increasing negative gate voltage. To further confirm electrical behaviors, the transfer characteristics of the sensor were measured (Fig. S5†). The transfer curve was observed in the Vg range from 0.2 V to −0.8 V at a constant drain voltage (Vsd = −100 mV). The Isd negatively increased according to negatively increasing Vg at the constant Vsd, which corresponded to the output characteristics. These results indicated that the FET sensor behaved like a p-type semiconductor (hole-transporting). The p-type behavior mainly originated from the CPPy coating layer on the MoS2 surface. The polymerization of CP monomers was achieved via chemical oxidation. Chemical oxidation polymerization leads to a typical p-type conjugated PPy.55,56 Moreover, the stable modulation of the Isd value was maintained across the varying Vg, which indicated that the current changes occurred by the electrostatic gating effect, rather than by contact resistance. These electrical characteristics suggest that the liquid-ion gated Apt-FMNS FET sensor is capable of detecting a signal change when Ars-3 interacts with target molecules.

3.6 Real-time responses for sensing of arsenite
A low-operating voltage is an important factor in FET-type biosensors. To prevent unwanted redox reactions in water or biomolecules, low voltages are necessary to make the biosensors suitable for sensing in a liquid environment. In addition, the low voltage operation reduces undesired damage to sensing devices and provides low power consumption. To utilize these significant advantages, real-time responses in this study were measured at Vsd = −50 mV and Vg = −5 mV. Fig. 5a reveals the real-time responses of the aptasensors using FMNSs and CFMNSs. The solutions (5 μL) containing various As(iii) concentrations were manually pipetted by using a micro-pipette, and the pipette was immersed in the PBS solution. To induce the interaction between the analyte and sensing layer, the analyte solutions in the pipette tip were gently injected above the sensing materials. The Isd values immediately increased after adding various As(iii) concentrations. This result suggests that the introduction of As(iii) in the sensor platform could be detected by observing the current changes that occur via a specific interaction between the As(iii) as the target analyte and the binding aptamer as the receptor. A plausible sensing mechanism is proposed based on the change in surface charge. An increasing current was induced by the accumulation of hole carriers elicited through the aptamer/arsenite binding interaction. Because the As(iii) ion has three hydroxyl groups (–OH) in PBS solution, it can be easily bound to the single-stranded DNA (ssDNA) aptamer. The –OH groups of the As(iii) were linked to the amine groups (–NH2) of the aptamer bases through strong hydrogen bonds.57 The single-stranded DNAs transformed into a folded and condensed structure by chemical bonds, which resulted in negative charges in the liquid-ion dielectric near the CFMNS surface. Consequently, positive charge carriers accumulated on the CFMNS transducer. The accumulated holes applied a p-type doping impact indirectly to the gate dielectric. Fig. 5a shows that both the FMNS and CFMNS FET aptasensors had outstanding response speeds (on a time scale of less than 1 s). However, there were differences in sensing performance between the Apt-FMNSs and Apt-CFMNSs aptasensors. The minimum detectable level (MDL) in the Apt-CFMNS sensor was 100 times more sensitive than that of the Apt-FMNS sensor. Moreover, the Apt-CFMNS sensor displayed a larger current change than the Apt-FMNS sensor when As(iii) was introduced into the FET configuration. The extraordinary performance of the Apt-CFMNSs originated from the aforementioned advantages of the CPPy layer. The CPPy layer provided high conductivity, stable contact, and immobilized more aptamers onto the FET sensors, leading to improved sensing performance. The MDL of the Apt-CFMNS sensor was 1 pM (with a signal-to-noise ratio of 4.57) and was two- to four orders of magnitude more sensitive than that of previous arsenite sensors using electrochemical methods (Table S2†). Interestingly, the CFMNS sensor without aptamers used as a control sample displayed only negligible variation. It was apparent that the Ars-3 aptamers interacted with target As(iii).


Fig. 5 Discrimination of target As(iii) with different sensors using CFMNS (black line), Apt-FMNS (grey line), and Apt-CFMNS (blue line). (a) Real-time responses and (b) calibration curves toward various As(iii) concentrations (1 pM to 10 nM) (Vg: −5 mV and Vsd: −50 mV).
Fig. 5b delineates the sensitive change (S) as a function of As(iii) concentration. The Apt-CFMNS sensor was more sensitive than the Apt-FMNS sensor. The sensitivity of the Apt-CFMNSs steadily increased as the As(iii) concentration increased in a wide range from 1 pM to 10 nM. Moreover, the sensitive change of the Apt-CFMNSs to As(iii) was linear and followed the relationship S(%) = 9.505 + 6.775log C where C is the As(iii) concentration in units of pM. In addition, the arsenite sensor showed outstanding repeatability. Aptamers represent advantages over antibodies, including better thermal and storage stability.58 Based on these advantages, the FET-type As(iii) aptasensor demonstrated an excellent reusable property (Fig. S6†).

Fig. 6 shows the selective responses of the Apt-CFMNS FET sensors toward As(iii). The selectivity test was conducted using the following non-target metal ions: Fe2+, Zn2+, Mg2+, Cu2+, Mn2+, Li+, Cd2+, Co2+, and Ni2+. Although the non-target metal ions were present at significantly higher concentrations (1 μM) than the As(iii) concentration (1 pM), no significant variations occurred when non-target ions were introduced to the FET sensors. However, the Isd values changed remarkably upon the addition of 1 pM concentration of As(iii) as the target analyte. Considering these results, our arsenite sensor was able to differentiate the target As(iii) from non-target metals with exceptional selectivity.


Fig. 6 (a–c) Selective responses of the Apt-CFMNSs FET sensor toward the target analyte (As(iii), 1 pM) and nontarget metal ions (Fe2+, Zn2+, Mg2+, Cu2+, Mn2+, Li+, Cd2+, Co2+, and Ni2+, 1 μM) (Vg: −5 mV and Vsd: −50 mV).
3.7. Arsenite discrimination from real water samples
To further exploit the selectivity of the FET aptasensor, additional experiments were conducted using a mixture of 1 μM concentration of the non-target metal ions (Fig. 7a). No notable changes were observed following the injection of the mixture sample, whereas significant current changes were observed upon the introduction of mixture samples containing 1 pM and 10 pM concentrations of As(iii). This result indicated that the FET aptasensor could selectively detect As(iii) in a complex mixture. Response experiments were conducted using real water samples to explore the possibility of using the FET aptasensor for practical applications. A water sample taken from the creek of the Han River in Seoul was used as the real water sample. ICPS was used to measure the concentrations of arsenic and non-target metals in the real sample. The river water sample contained arsenic at a concentration of ca. 5 μM (Table S3†). The introduction of real samples involved pipetting the samples into the PBS solution. The addition of the pristine river sample changed the current signal (Fig. 7b). The current change was relatively low compared with the response in Fig. 7a. The values of the biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) and the chemical oxygen demand (COD) are correlated with the amount of organics and inorganics in water. The BOD and COD measured in the Han River creek are detected at high concentrations, signifying the presence of diverse organics and inorganics in the creek.59 In addition, many micropollutants are observed in the creeks of the Han River. Therefore, the real sample derived from the Han River creek may have various organics, inorganics, and chemical compounds. It can be concluded that these diverse non-target compounds interfere with the aptamer interaction and reduce the response toward the real sample. Subsequently, the Isd of the liquid-ion gated FET sensor further increased when the river water sample was spiked with As(iii) at a concentration of 5 μM. These crucial results demonstrate that our FET sensor is capable of discriminating As(iii) in real water samples and suggest its potential for practical applications.


Fig. 7 (a) Selective response of the Apt-CFMNSs FET sensor toward 1 pM, and 10 pM concentrations of As(iii) in a mixture containing 1 μM of the nontarget metal ions. (b) Real-time response from river water as the real water sample (Vg: −5 mV and Vsd: −50 mV).
4. Conclusions
In summary, we successfully fabricated a liquid-ion gated FET-type sensor for arsenic based on aptamer-conjugated CFMNSs as a transducer. The CFMNSs were readily prepared through simple hydrothermal and vapor deposition processes. The flower-like structure of the CFMNSs provided a large specific surface area, which enabled the loading of a considerable number of aptamers. Coating with a layer of CPPy played a pivotal role in improving the sensing performance due to its functional group and high conductivity. The FET-type aptasensor exhibited a rapid response time of <1 s, enabling real-time detection of As(iii). The minimum detectable level (MDL) of the arsenic sensor was 1 pM, which is two- to four orders of magnitude more sensitive than that of previous electrochemical sensors. Moreover, the MoS2-based aptasensor selectively discriminated As(iii) from numerous other metal ions and accurately detected As(iii) in a mixed solution. This FET-type sensor detected target As(iii) in real samples of river water. Our findings demonstrate the potential of this FET sensor in advanced As(iii) analyzers for a wide range of practical applications.

Supporting Information for:
Highly sensitive FET-type aptasensor using flower-like MoS2
nanospheres for real-time detection of arsenic(III)
Ji Hyun An, †, Jyongsik Jang, †, *
†School of Chemical and Biological Engineering, Seoul National University, Seoul 151-742, Republic
of Korea
Corresponding Author:
†Tel: +82-2-880-7069; Fax: +82-2-880-1604
*E-mail: jsjang@plaza.snu.ac.kr
Electronic Supplementary Material (ESI) for Nanoscale.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Fig. S1. XPS patterns of FMNSs a) before annealing, b) after annealing at 400℃, and c) after
annealing at 600℃.

Fig. S2. XPS pattern of bulk-MoS2.
Fig. S3. The absorbance of immobilized aptamer on FMNS and CFMNS surfaces before and
after washing.
- NanoDrop 2000/2000c spectrophotometer was used to evaluate the concentration of
immobilized aptamer on the FMNS and CFMNS surfaces. The solution of Ars-3 aptamer (1
µM) was measured before introduced into the FMNS and CFMNS surfaces (Fig. S3, red-line),
revealing 32.2 ng/mL concentration. The aptamer solution was exposed to the surfaces for 6h,
and then rinsed with buffer solution. The washed solutions for the FMNS and CFMNS samples
were measured (Fig. S2, black and blue lines). Each of concentrations after washing was 15.1
ng/µL and 2.6 ng/µL. From these results, 17.1 and 29.6 ng/µL concentrations of aptamer were
immobilized on the FMNS and CFMNS surfaces, respectively.

Fig. S4. Current–voltage (I–V) curve of FMNSs-based electrode.

Fig. S5. Transfer characteristics of CFMNS sensor for a constant Vsd = – 100 mV (Vg, 0.2 to –
0.8 V).

Fig. S6. A re-useable FET system for As(III) detection; the sensitivity changes were measured
through the consecutive assay of three times at 1 pM, 100 pM, and 1 nM concentrations of
As(III) (the sensitivity change was calculated as S/So, where So is the initial sensitivity and S
is the measured sensitivity after washing and rinsing process).
- Fig. S6 demonstrates the reusable property of the FET sensor (the sensitivity changes were
calculated as S/So, where So is the initial sensitivity and S is the measured sensitivity after the
washing and rinsing processes). The sensitivity changes were calculated three times at various
concentrations of As(III) (1 pM, 100 pM, and 1 nM). The recycle process is composed of two
steps: (i) introduction of the As(III) into the aptasensor, (ii) washing with dilute sodium
chloride solution and PBS, and then drying under nitrogen stream. The FET-type aptasensors
showed an efficient repeatability with various As(III) concentrations by regenerating the
aptamer in dilute NaCl solution. Although, the sensitivity decreased slightly at 1 nM
concentration of As(III) (ca. 6%) due to aptamer degradation, this result indicates that the
aptasensor features reproducible and reusable properties.

Table. S1. Zeta potential measurements for FMNS samples.
FMNSs Zeta Potential (mV)
Sample 1 -73.46
Sample 2 -79.54
Sample 3 -84.60

Table S2. Sensing performance compared with previous researches using electrochemical method.
Detection methods Sensing materials Detection limit References
Electrochemistry Au nanoparticles 200 pM 19
Electrochemistry Ag /GO nanocomposites 240 pM 41
Electrochemistry FePt nanoparticles 10 nM 42
Electrochemistry SnO2 nanosheets 50 nM 43
Electrochemistry(FET) CPPy-coated MoS2 nanospheres 1 pM This work
Table S3. Inductively Coupled Plasma-Atomic Emission Spectrometer (ICPS) analysis for Han River.
Metal Weight concentration (mg/L) Molar concentration (mM)
As 0.381 0.0052
Mg 8.488 0.3486
Fe 0 0
Zn 0 0
Cu 0 0
Mn 0 0
Li 0 0
Cd 0 0
Co 0 0
Ni 0 0