Letícia M. M. Ferro

Brazilian Nanotechnology National Laboratory (LNNano), Brazilian Center for Research in Energy and Materials (CNPEM), Giuseppe Máximo Scolfaro 10000, Polo II de Alta Tecnologia, Campinas, 13083-100 Brazil

Institute of Chemistry (IQ), University of Campinas (UNICAMP), Cidade Universitária “Zeferino Vaz”, Campinas, 13083-970 Brazil

Leandro Merces

Davi H. S. de Camargo

Corresponding Author

Carlos C. Bof Bufon

Postgraduate Program in Materials Science and Technology (POSMAT), São Paulo State University (UNESP), Bauru, São Paulo, 17033-360 Brazil

E-mail:carlos.bufon@Lnnano.cnpem.br

Give access

Share full-text access

Use the link below to share a full-text version of this article with your friends and colleagues.Learn more.

Share a link

Organic electrochemical transistors (OECTs) are technologically relevant devices presenting high susceptibility to physical stimulus, chemical functionalization, and shape changes—jointly to versatility and low production costs. The OECT capability of liquid-gating addresses both electrochemical sensing and signal amplification within a single integrated device unit. However, given the organic semiconductor time-consuming doping process and their usual low field-effect mobility, OECTs are frequently considered low-end category devices. Toward high-performance OECTs, microtubular electrochemical devices based on strain-engineering are presented here by taking advantage of the exclusive shape features of self-curled nanomembranes. Such novel OECTs outperform the state-of-the-art organic liquid-gated transistors, reaching lower operating voltage, improved ion doping, and a signal amplification with a >104intrinsic gain. The multipurpose OECT concept is validated with different electrolytes and distinct nanometer-thick molecular films, namely, phthalocyanine and thiophene derivatives. The OECTs are also applied as transducers to detect a biomarker related to neurological diseases, the neurotransmitter dopamine. The self-curled OECTs update the premises of electrochemical energy conversion in liquid-gated transistors, yielding a substantial performance improvement and new chemical sensing capabilities within picoliter sampling volumes.

The development of transistors with high gain is a requirement in a broad range of applications in which a small input signal produces a large output response. For this purpose, organic electrochemical transistors (OECTs) have attracted much attention since their realization in 1984.[1]The OECT consists of an ion-permeable organic semiconductor channel (OSC)—mixed ionic/electronic conductor[2,3]—that connects source (S) and drain (D) terminals. The dielectric layer is an electrolyte contacting both OSC and gate (G) terminal. The working principle involves controlling the field effect and the electrochemical doping of the channel. Hence, the OSC conductivity can be adjusted by an external gate voltage (VG). The ion injection into the OSC is probed by applying a source–drain voltage (VDS), which induces an electric current (IDS) across the OSC.[4-8]Consequently, the OECT high gain is properly assigned to the OSC effective doping, achieved during device operation.[9,10]This operation principle represents several technological application opportunities,[4-6,11]which currently comprise chemical and biochemical interfacing,[12,13]neuromorphic engineering,[14]digital logic developments,[15]printed electronics manufacturing,[16]and lab-on-a-chip applications.[17,18]

Any novel-OECT architectures need to address two relevant aspects, high efficiency, and performance.[4,5]The former is associated with the operating conditions that affect power consumption (e.g., low operating voltage and high gain). The latter regards obtaining superior transconductance values, output currents, andION/IOFFratios, to mention a few.[18-24]According to the OECT working principle, the efficiency and performance can be improved by boosting both gate electric field[4,5]and ion diffusion.[25]Such features are severely impacted by the surface–volume ratio displayed by the corresponding analytical environment—a scenario in which self-curled nanomembranes (NMs) have successfully shown the remarkable capability of improving electrochemical energy conversion and storage within shrunk device components.[26,27]As nanometer-thick, freestanding, bendable, and twistable structures,[28]which can be strain-engineered to form microcylindrical cavities,[29]the NMs offer plenty of room for mass-transport-driven lab-on-a-chip integration.[30]The self-curling can be controlled very well by standard semiconductor processing techniques, whereas the tubular geometry, winding angle, the number of consecutive windings, and coil diameter can be adjusted precisely to provide specific device functionality.[31]Such fine control may be further improved by the possibility of joining different materials—viz. 2D-materials, semiconductors, metals, and oxides—into the functional NM-device manufacture.[31]For solid–liquid interfacing, the use of NMs allows small sampling volumes and ensures both electric-field and ion-diffusion enhancements.[26,30,32-34]From this perspective, using NMs to exploit the OECT's versatile features is a unique opportunity—especially considering the shape factors that NMs and OECTs display individually and what they can achieve when combined. Here we demonstrate how strain-engineered NMs can deterministically be employed to boost OECTs efficiency and performance. We also propose that such a novel OECT architecture may open new chemical and biochemical sensing and lab-on-a-chip interfacing possibilities.

The OECTs’ fabrication involves standard photolithography and thin-film deposition processes (details in Supporting Information).[26]Figure1a.1shows the architecture of a planar structure before the deposition of a 30 nm thick copper(II) phthalocyanine (CuPc) film. This structure consists of D, S, and a coplanar G. Figure1a.2illustrates the planar device (p-OECT)—with a channel having 166 µm width (W) and 20 µm length (L). The total area covered by the CuPc film is (173 × 72) µm2. A similar p-OECT structure is also patterned on the top of a sacrificial layer. The selective removal of such a sacrificial layer allows the whole active region of the device to roll-up, as illustrated in Figure1a.3. The rolled-up device (r-OECT) is shown in Figure1a.4. Notice that the electrical terminals are placed on the microcylindrical shell's inner walls (≈20 µm diameter). The r-OECTs haveW= 57.1 µm andL= 20 µm. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of p-OECT and r-OECT are exhibited in Figure1b, whereas the dashed (black) line in Figure1b.1highlights the OSC. The cross-sectional views along the dotted lines (xz-plane) are sketched at the bottom of the SEM images in Figure1b, which also exhibits the respective electrical measurement configuration. The red arrows in Figure1brepresent the hole current across the OSC during device operation. Figure1cshows the atomic force microscopy (AFM) image of an as-grown 30 nm thick CuPc film on the Au electrode, whereas the inset is the chemical structure of CuPc. The film root-mean-square roughness is (6 ± 1) nm.

The p-OECT and r-OECT output curves are displayed in Figure1d. In comparison to p-OECT, the r-OECT exhibits higherIDSvalues. This is also valid considering that the r-OECT displays a smaller channel area (W×tOSC, wheretOSCis OSC thickness, as shown in Figure1d). The output characteristics are typical of p-type transistors, with saturation regimes for negativeVG. WhenVGis negative, cations migrate from the electrolyte toward G, while anions are repelled toward the OSC surface. Thus, anions attract positive charge carriers that accumulate at the CuPc/water (H2O) interface, enabling the OSC's electrical conduction. The G-induced field also allows ion penetration into the OSC bulk, which impactsIDS.[4,5]In Figure1d, the higher hysteresis observed in the r-OECT indicates that its electrochemical doping is slightly enhanced compared to p-OECT.

We argue that the improved performance of r-OECT, shown in Figure1d.2, is driven by a more efficient ion transport within the microtubular environment in comparison to p-OECTs (Figure1d.1). To quantitatively evaluate the electrolyte confinement role in the output curves exhibited in Figure1d, we have performed a finite-element simulation and further calculated the devices’ electric field distributions forVG= -1 V.Figure2ashows the calculated field lines. We found that the field lines are close to each other inside the r-OECT. When compared to p-OECT's S/D edges (FigureS1, Supporting Information), we found that r-OECT's may provide an approximately four time electric-fieldz-component intensification. As the devices operate in a dielectric solution, the r-OECT provides more ion migration to compensate for the higher electric field established throughout its solution media (≈69 pL). Consequently, whenVG< 0 is applied, more anions can migrate toward the r-OECT's OSC surface than on the p-OECT's. The more anion migration, the more OSC doping effectiveness. This explains the performance gain achieved by self-rolled transistors.

Accordingly, dashed and continuous lines in Figure2bshowIDSandIDS0.5versusVG, respectively. In Figure2b, the linear regression returns the threshold voltage (Vt) for both device geometries:Vtp-OECT= (-0.42 ± 0.02) V andVtr-OECT= (-0.38 ± 0.01) V (more details in FigureS3,Supporting Information). The slightly low absolute value ofVtfor the self-rolled devices may be ascribed to the enhancement of the electric field in the confined microenvironment.[36]We also estimate the deviceION/IOFFratios, 323 ± 104 for p-OECT and 1602 ± 250 for r-OECT. In the literature, typical OECTION/IOFFratios are usually found around 102–105,[17,23]whereas for a CuPc-based device is 102–103.[37]Notably, the curled device provides higherIONvalues and lowerIOFF. The OECT amplification is correlated to the maximum transconductance,gm(EquationS2, Supporting Information). We foundgmp-OECT= (19 ± 6) nS at (-0.98 ± 0.04) V, andgmr-OECT= (42 ± 2) nS at (-0.94 ± 0.01) V, as shown in FigureS4(Supporting Information).

Figure2cshows electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) data (C*vs frequency) for both OECTs, adopting a capacitor-like configuration, as shown in the insets. The arrows in Figure2cindicate the curve behavior asVGdecreases from 0 to -0.6 V. Accordingly,C*p-OECT= (2.1 ± 0.4) F cm–3andC*r-OECT= (4.6 ± 0.5) F cm–3, at 0.1 Hz frequency andVG= 0. The CuPc field-effect mobility is calculated using Equation1. We found μp-OECT= (0.7 ± 0.3) × 10–3cm2V–1s– 1and μr-OECT= (1.6 ± 0.2) × 10–3cm2V–1s–1, both comparable with the reported in the literature.[37]As the organic thin films are grown on a flat counterpart device and further bent into a cylindrical shell, the slight mobility increase achieved by the r-OECT can be attributed to the OSC conformational changes eventually taken during the device self-curling.

In the current transient measurements (Figure2d), we found sudden rises, followed by a decrease ofIDSas aVGsquare-pulse is applied (0, -0.6 V). This indicates that the transient current is governed by charge carrier extraction from the CuPc film due to its slow transport rate, that is justified byL>>tOSC.[36]The transient current is given by EquationS3(Supporting Information).[36]Using the linear regression (EquationS4, Supporting Information), the ionic displacement time constants (τi) are found, τip-OECT= (16.4 ± 2.5) s and τir-OECT= (16.0 ± 1.5) s (Figure2d, insets). Also, the electronic current time constant (τe), which is equivalent toL2× μ−1×VDS−1, results in τep-OECT= (0.03 ± 0.02) s and τer-OECT= (0.006 ± 0.001) s. Considering EquationS5(Supporting Information), the proportionality constant that indicates the nonuniformity of the doping process (ψ) is found, 1800 ± 600 and 4500 ± 100 for p-OECT and r-OECT, respectively. The higher ψr-OECTimplies a prominent nonuniformity in the OSC doping process. As the electric field is more intense in the curled system, the CuPc film surface is possibly more doped than its bulk. Such an argument also justifies the r-OECT's pronounced hysteresis in the transfer characteristics (Figure2b).

The doping process is outlined inFigure3a–c. When the transistor is in off-state (VG= 0, Figure3a), ions and charge carriers are dispersed in the electrolyte and within the OSC, respectively. WhenVGis applied, ions start migrating toward the CuPc/electrolyte interface, and a moderate field-effect doping process initiates and establishes a conductive channel (Figure3b). Once the measurement time (t) reaches τi,[36]the electrochemical doping of the OSC becomes significant, and the OECT-like operation takes place. As illustrated in Figure3c,IDSincreases oncet> τidue to contributions of both OSC interface and OSC bulk doping. A molecular mechanism proposed to explain the CuPc ion-doping is presented in FigureS5(Supporting Information).

Given the electrochemical-doping principle, different electrolytes may impact the OECT efficiency and performance. Figure3dshows the r-OECT output curves (atVG= -1 V) in H2O, 0.01mphosphate-buffered saline (PBS, pH 6.5) solution and 0.1msodium chloride (NaCl) solution. By considering the curves measured at υ  = 0.002 V s–1(open circles), the highestIDSand the most considerable hysteresis are found for measurements carried out in NaCl solution. This is related to more intense but slower doping processes occurring in NaCl solution. To confirm if the hysteresis in such media is due to the doping process, we performed a slow measurement (full circles in Figure3d, υ  = 0.001 V s–1, ≈15.5 min) to allow ions to penetrate the OSC. Such a low-υ output curve presents more negligible hysteresis and a higherIDSthan the υ  = 0.002 V s–1curves, corroborating that the system gets more doped at low-υ. Figure3eshows the transfer curves for each electrolyte atVDS= -0.4 V. For clarity, we present the backward traces and error bars arising from triplicate experiments in FigureS6(Supporting Information). From the transfer curves, bothIONandIOFFincrease due to the electrolyte's influence on the CuPc film doping. Figure3fshows the performance comparison of the CuPc devices in different electrolytes. The figures-of-merit evaluated areION/IOFFratio,μC*, current density (JDS),Vt, andgm. Each parameter is normalized by the respective value displayed by the r-OECT in H2O. We may notice that electrolyte changes led to the r-OECTION/IOFFratio decrease. This effect is justified by the enhancement of both on- and off-state conductivities, indicating that a minor ion penetration may also occur at very lowVG(<Vt). Additionally, we notice considerableμC*improvements by switching electrolytes. We attribute the lowerμC*displayed in H2O to the higher anion solvation that swells the OSC and compromisesμC*.[38]We infer that the main improvements observed inμC*,JDS,Vt, andgmare due to the different sizes, electronegativity, solvation, and permeability that each respective electrolyte anion displays.

The multipurpose feature of our devices as an electrolyte-gated organic field-effect transistor (EGOFET) is demonstrated by employing a 30 nm thick dinaphtho[2,3-b:2′,3′-f]thieno[3,2-b]thiophene (DNTT) film as OSC.[39]A molecular mechanism proposed to explain the apparent absence of ion-doping into the DNTT thin film is presented in FigureS5(Supporting Information). Figure3gshows the DNTT-EGOFET output curves (0.2 V >VG> -1.2 V), whereas the inset is the chemical structure of DNTT. Figure3his the transistor transfer curve acquired atVDS= -0.4 V. The small hysteresis highlights the EGOFET behavior provided by the DNTT film. The inset in Figure3hillustrates the field-effect doping of our EGOFET. It is noteworthy that bothIONandIOFFincreased in comparison to the CuPc-OECTs respective features. Figure3ishows the comparison between CuPc- and DNTT-transistors. All parameters are normalized using the response of the CuPc r-OECT in H2O. The incorporation of DNTT modified the device performance considering theION/IOFFratio, the μC parameter (whereCis the capacitance per unit of area), andJDS. We attribute the changes to the different working principles of OECTs and EGOFETs—the OSC in the latter is ion-impermeable and precludes electrochemical doping. Such a distinct working principle also requires a correction of OECTμC* bytOSCto a fair comparison with the EGOFETμCvalue (as pointed out in Figure3i). Furthermore, both efficiency and performance improvements are achieved by the DNTT-EGOFETs consideringVtandgm, respectively. However, we should remark that such enhancements are considerably lower than achieved using NaCl solution in the CuPc r-OECT (Figure3i).

To establish a fair comparison between the transistor platforms proposed here and the diverse state-of-the-art OECTs and EGOFETs,[17,18,21-24,37,40-53]we calculated the device's intrinsic gain (gmnormalized by the OSC conductanceg) as shown inFigure4a(details in the Supporting Information). Thegm×g–1values are plotted as a function of the geometrical parameterW×tOSC×L–1that modulates the output current in OECTs (Equation1). This figure-of-merit is crucial when dealing with miniaturization routes that preserve OECT's efficiency and high performance.[18]Consequently, Figure4ahighlights the potential of our OECT platforms toward applications using different OSCs. In Figure4a,gm×g–1< 1 is related to devices based on poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS), which exhibitIONatVG≈ 0 (i.e., depletion-mode devices). Accordingly, the ≈10–4intrinsic gain of a PEDOT:PSS device is comparable with a ≈104intrinsic gain of an enhancement-mode transistor. Considering bothgm×g–1andW×tOSC×L–1, our devices surpass the state-of-the-art OECTs. One may notice that most devices in Figure4ause electrolytes other than H2O. On this subject, the r-OECT in NaCl solution displayed an intrinsic gain that surpasses the shortest-Lvertical EGOFET measured in ionic liquid.[46]Also, the OECT characteristics demonstrate that NMs are attractive candidates to manipulate and improve the transistor features, without the need for sophisticated nanolithography tools, reducing costs and simplifying production. The intrinsic gains of p-OECT and r-OECT (≈103–106) evidence the technological potential of such devices in further lab-on-a-chip developments, sincegm×g–1controls signal amplification.

As the r-OECT performs better than the p-OECT, the self-rolled system is used for dopamine (DA) sensing. For this purpose, we performed cyclic voltammetry (CV) in 5 × 10-3m[Fe(CN)6]3–/4–(ferri/ferrocyanide) and 5 × 10-3mDA media, as shown in Figure4b,c. The continuous lines are blank-solution voltammograms. Full- and open-circles are for voltammograms using working electrodes based on i) bare Au and ii) 30 nm thick CuPc-film-covered Au. Both situations are illustrated on the top of Figure4b,c, and the respective oxidation events, viz. Ferro-Ferri and leucodopaminechrome–dopaminechrome (DAL–DAC). The DAL and DAC species are products of DA oxidation.[54]In Figure4b,cno reduction signature is observed when CuPc covers the Au electrode. This effect indicates that the 30 nm thick OSC covers the entire Au surface and corroborates that hole conduction across the OSC prevails (details are provided in the Supporting Information).[55]Based on such observation, we can also assert that a specific DA oxidation event occurs on the OSC surface. Consequently, the OSC can be employed to probe the DAL-DAC charge transfer viaIDS-monitoring as DA concentration [DA] changes. The system selectivity to DA oxidation is analyzed in FigureS7(Supporting Information).

Figure4dexhibits the r-OECT transfer curves acquired as [DA] increases (right-hand vertical arrow). Notice that we have adopted an alternative electrical configuration (Figure4e, inset), ensuring the positiveVDSoperation required for DAL oxidation on the CuPc surface (VDS= 0.4 V). Such a measurement configuration also guarantees theIDSdirection used previously (Figure1b.2, inset). In Figure4d,IDSdecreases as [DA] increases, indicating electron transfer from DA to the OSC during r-OECT operation. As the DA oxidation occurs, the OSC hole-driven current decreases. The DA sensor calibration curve is obtained in terms ofION/IOFFratio (Figure4e). This parameter is an essential figure-of-merit since slightIOFFvariation is also observed as [DA] changes. Figure4eshows two linear ranges ofION/IOFFversus [DA]: 1) 0 < [DA] < 10 × 10-6m, and 2) 50 × 10–6m< [DA] < 500 × 10-6m. Accordingly, from the calibration curve slopes, we have calculated each respective sensitivity,S(1)DA= (0.52 ± 0.13) μM–1andS(2)DA= (0.004 ± 0.001) μM–1. According to EquationS6(Supporting Information), the limit of detection, LOD  = (3.04 ± 0.49) × 10-6m, is a value compatible with clinical DA levels expected in urine samples.[56]Although alternative functionalization routes and gate-material/OSC exchange are viable means to reach better LODs,[12,57]here, we focused on a straightforward application without additional changes to the r-OECTs. Indeed, we exploited the CuPc capability to oxidize DA since the use of extra mediators can be problematic and interfere in the biochemical sensing.[58]

Envisioning real-life sensor and biosensor applications, the OSC stability in aqueous electrolytes is crucial. The literature shows that the OSC stability may be evaluated as a function of the doping/dedoping cycle number.[9,10,59]To get some insight into r-OECTs’ stability in DA chemical sensing, we have performed 128 doping/dedoping consecutive transfer curves in PBS (i.e., blank solution for DA detection) and further analyzed theION/IOFFratio as a function of cycle number. We found that r-OECTsION/IOFF-ratio retention is ≈33% over 128 transfer-characteristic cycles. A complete analysis of the OSC stability, which also considers theIDS-amplitude retention, is presented in FigureS8(Supporting Information). Finally, one may argue that DA polymerization can spontaneously coat the electrode surfaces, impairing DA-sensor reuse.[54]SEM images in Figure4f,gshow the structure of the self-curled devices before and after their extensive use. Figure4gis obtained with uncleaned devices used in electrical characterization (output and transfer cycles), and five times in [DA] transduction. Despite the evident accumulated dust, the integrity of the device in its tubular shape is maintained. As shown by Figure4e, the r-OECT chemosensor recovers its initial response in ≈75% after a cleaning procedure using 10 × 10–3mPBS with no potential applied. The recovering protocol guarantees r-OECT a few (≈5–6) additional and reliable reuse cycles for DA chemical detection.

The OECTs based on self-curled NMs (r-OECTs) feature small-molecule nanometer-thick OSCs and exhibit improved performance in comparison to their planar staggered counterparts (p-OECTs). Lower operating voltages, faster sensing responses related to ionic displacement, more intense output current, and higher signal amplification are also demonstrated for r-OECTs. In practice, considering the achieved intrinsic gain and the geometrical features required for electrochemical transistor rational miniaturization, the r-OECTs surpass the state-of-the-art organic performance liquid-gated transistors. The r-OECT multipurpose concept is attested by employing different electrolyte solutions and two distinct OSCs (viz., CuPc and DNTT). The r-OECT chemical sensing ability is verified by detecting dopamine concentrations quite compatible with clinical levels. Accordingly, we conclude that the integration between electrochemical transistors and self-curled NMs can update and broader liquid-gated transistors’ efficiency, performance, and applications range. This represents a considerable impact for strategic fields, such as chemical and biochemical sensing, neuromorphic engineering, and lab-on-a-chip interfacing.

The authors acknowledge FAPESP (processes 2017/21117-4, 2018/18136-0, 2013/22127-2, and 2014/25979-2), CAPES, CNPq, and SISNANO for financial support. C.C.B.B. is a productivity research fellow from CNPq (306768/2019-4). C.C.B.B. also acknowledges the support of CNPq (465452/2014-0), 408770/2018-0) and FAPESP (2014/50906-9) through Inomat, National Institute (INCT) for Complex Functional Materials. The authors also thank the National Center for Research in Energy and Materials (CNPEM) and the Brazilian Nanotechnology National Laboratory (LNNano): Electron Microscopy Laboratory (proposal SEM-24160) for SEM images; and L. D. Palermo, E. L. Pires, C. C. Corrêa and M. P. Pereira for the technical support.

Note: The presentation of the author name Carlos C. Bof Bufon was corrected on July 20, 2021, after initial publication online.

The authors declare no conflict of interest.

L.M.M.F. and L.M. contributed equally to this work. L.M.M.F fabricated the devices, performed electrical and electrochemical characterizations and data evaluation, discussed results, and wrote the manuscript. L.M. supervised the experiments, performed finite-element simulation, electrical characterization, and AFM analysis, discussed results, and wrote the manuscript. D.H.S.C. technically supported the experiments in the cleanroom facilities. C.C.B.B led the investigation, supervised the experiments, discussed results, and wrote the manuscript.

The data that support the findings of this study are available on request from the corresponding author. The data are not publicly available due to privacy or ethical restrictions.

Please note: The publisher is not responsible for the content or functionality of any supporting information supplied by the authors. Any queries (other than missing content) should be directed to the corresponding author for the article.

Volume33,Issue29

July 22, 2021

2101518

Copyright © 1999-2025John Wiley & Sons, Incor related companies. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence technologies or similar technologies.

Your password has been changed

Enter your email address below.

Please check your email for instructions on resetting your password.
                    If you do not receive an email within 10 minutes, your email address may not be registered,
                    and you may need to create a new Wiley Online Library account.

Can't sign in? Forgot your username?

Enter your email address below and we will send you your username

If the address matches an existing account you will receive an email with instructions to retrieve your username