Hyun-June Jang

Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Johns Hopkins University, 3400 N. Charles St, Baltimore, MD, 21218-2608 USA

Justine Wagner

Yunjia Song

Taein Lee

Corresponding Author

Howard E. Katz

E-mail:hekatz@jhu.edu

Give access

Share full-text access

Use the link below to share a full-text version of this article with your friends and colleagues.Learn more.

Share a link

A systematic analysis is used to understand electrical drift occurring in field-effect transistor (FET) dissolved-analyte sensors by investigating its dependence on electrode surface-solution combinations in a remote-gate (RG) FET configuration. Water at pH 7 and neat acetonitrile, having different dipoles and polarizabilities, are applied to the RG surface of indium tin oxide, SiO2, hexamethyldisilazane-modified SiO2, polystyrene, poly(styrene-co-acrylic acid), poly(3-hexylthiophene-2,5-diyl) (P3HT), and poly [3-(3-carboxypropyl)thiophene-2,5-diyl] (PT-COOH). It is discovered that in some cases a slow reorientation of dipoles at the interface induced by gate electric fields causes severe drift and hysteresis because of induced interface potential changes. Conductive and charged P3HT and PT-COOH increase electrochemical stability by promoting fast surface equilibrations. It is also demonstrated that pH sensitivity of P3HT (17 mV per pH) is an indication of proton doping. PT-COOH shows further enhanced pH sensitivity (30 mV per pH). This combination of electrochemical stability and pH response in PT-COOH are proposed as advantageous for polymer-based biosensors.

Field-effect transistor (FET) biosensors inevitably contain a solution interface contact on the sensing material where receptors for dissolved biomarkers are placed. A solution interface under the influence of an electric field (EF) is a source of electrochemical instability (potential drift) that challenges real-time diagnostics by affecting device sensitivity, specificity, and limit-of-detection. Drift (ΔVdri) in n-FETs exhibited as a slow, monotonic, and temporal increase in threshold voltage (Vth) from the initialVth(Vth0) to saturation point (Vsat) has been shown as a common behavior over a diverse range of sensing materials.[1-3]This can arise from slow response of buried surface sites,[1]the injection of electrons,[2]and accumulation and migration of ions.[3]Commonalities in drift observations could suggest related roles of solutions in drift.[4]In recent molecular dynamic simulations, dipoles in the solution are found to be oriented on the surface by the appliedEF(saturation effect)[5]leading to inhomogeneous dielectric permittivity (εr) of the solution, which occurs even on hydrophobic surfaces.[6-8]This orientational ordering at the interface gives rise to a steep reduction of εr[6,7,9-11]and double layer capacitance (CDL),[8,12]as well as charge screening.[12]

Organic materials show larger drift components compared to inorganic surfaces.[13]Nonetheless, transparency, flexibility, and integrability with textiles and skin are valuable attributes of organic materials for wearable electronics.[14]Recently, conjugated polymers have received considerable attention as active sensing layers for organic electrochemical transistors (OECTs)[15]due to enhanced stability, long lifetime, and fast response for voltage cycles in ionic liquids.[16]Progress requires better understanding of the mechanistic factors behind drift. However, it is challenging to discriminate the kinetics of dipole moment orientations on the surface of a conjugated polymer with an OECT structure because the drain current of an OECT is determined by multiple species, such as hole carriers, mobile ions in solutions, ions that diffuse into conjugated polymers, interface traps between material interfaces, and products of redox reactions.

Meanwhile, the remote-gate FET (RGFET), in which a sensitive surface is integrated with a commercial Si-FET (Figure1), only translates the surface potential (ψs) of RG material to the gate of the Si-FET[17]due to the high input impedance of the Si-FET (Figure S1, Supporting Information). Thus, the RGFET is advantageous for the investigations of solution interfaces as a function of dipole moments and specific surface responses to the dipole moments. To be specific, the electrical potential of a solution interface can be analyzed by measuring changes inVthand transconductance (Gm) of RGFETs relative to those of the Si-FET;Vth(1.5 V) andGm(66 µS) of the Si-FET remain consistent over all our experiments (Figure S1, Supporting Information). These are defined asVFETandGFET, respectively.

In this paper, we connect ΔVdri, drift inGm(ΔGdri), and hysteresis inVth(ΔVhys) and inGm(ΔGhys) to slow dipole rearrangement at the interface by discovering a dependency between electric charges of RG surfaces and dipole moments of the solution on the solution interface. ΔVhysand ΔGhysherein are a difference inVthandGmbetween forward sweep mode (FSM) and reverse sweep mode (RSM). Different dipole moments from a pH7 aqueous buffer solution and an organic solvent acetonitrile (ACN) were initially applied on various surfaces (Figure1) including indium tin oxide (ITO), SiO2, hexamethyldisilazane (HMDS), polystyrene (PS), and poly(styrene-co-acrylic acid) (PSAA, 60% PS).

The ITO surface represents a highly stable inorganic surface in an aqueous solution. In contrast, a hydrophilic SiO2surface induces severe drift especially stemming from slow hydration of buried hydroxyl sites underneath SiO2surfaces.[18,19]HDMS and PS layers deposited on SiO2exhibit properties of hydrophobic surfaces including severe electrochemical instability. A PSAA layer is amphiphilic but its backbone is nonconductive. PSAA reveals severe instability in a pH7 solution but presents insignificant ΔVdriand ΔVhysin a nonpolar ACN solution since the chargeable groups inducing orientations of ACN dipoles create less dipolar polarization at the interface. In contrast, poly(3-hexylthiophene-2,5-diyl) (P3HT) that has many mobile positive charges from poly-thiophene backbones shows enhanced stability in the aqueous solution although its surface is hydrophobic. Moreover, poly [3-(3-carboxypropyl)thiophene-2,5-diyl] (PT-COOH) shows even higher stability than P3HT in an aqueous solution.

For the RGFET analysis,Vth0andVsatare an indication of the initial interfacial potential ψsand the final ψsaffected by dipole orientations at quasiequilibrium, respectively. IfVth0of the RGFETs is higher thanVFET, we state that the RG initially imposes negative electrical potentials on the gate of the Si-FET and vice versa, because positive voltage turns on the n-type Si-FET.

The ITO surface shows stableVthandGmin both ACN (1.8 V, 65.8 µS) and pH7 solution (1.54 V, 64.8 µS) with no observable ΔVdri, ΔVhys,ΔGdri, or ΔGhys(Figure S2, Supporting Information). InitialGm(Gm0) only decreases by 0.3% in ACN and 1.8% in pH7 compared toGFET. High pH sensitivity (52 mV per pH, close to Nernstian with 99.7% linearity) was reversible with no ΔGdrior ΔGhys(Figure S3, Supporting Information).

The typical drift characteristics are presented from SiO2, HMDS, PS, and PSAA surfaces in pH7 water in orange-colored data overFigure2a–d. Three of the systems showed slow evolution ofVth0toVsat. Each transfer curve is shown in Figure S4 (Supporting Information). DivergentVth0of each RG converges to a similar range inVsat(SiO2: 1.86 V, HMDS: 1.83 V PS: 1.84 V, PSAA: 1.8 V), indicating an achievement of similar ψsfrom dipole orientations induced by the same voltage biasing conditions. When gateEFis disconnected, eachVth0recovers quickly, while reversible drift curves are obtained. This could be explained as dipoles being slowly and temporarily anchored at the interface only as a result of appliedEFschmatically shown in Figure2e.

ΔVdriand ΔGdriis further referenced toVth0andGFET, respectively. Large ΔVdri(8%) is observed from the SiO2surface due to slowly hydrated surfaces (Figure2a, Supporting Information). However,Gm0of hydrophilic SiO2(64.2 µS) only decreases by 2.7% relative toGFETwith a small ΔGdriof 3.3%. Similar ΔVdriare repeated over pH3 to 11 solutions resulting in the limited SiO2pH sensitivity of 2 mV per pH (Figure S5a, Supporting Information).Gmalso varies depending on pH of solutions (Figure S5b, Supporting Information). This shows the drift from hydration is associated with a low pH sensitivity of SiO2.

Both HMDS (Figure2b) and PS (Figure2c) present a larger ΔVdriof 17% due to a competing relation between hydrophobic surface-solution interactions. Unstable orientational ordering is enforced by the applied gateEFschmatically shown in Figure2f. Accordingly,Gm0of HMDS (61.3 µS) and PS (56.3 µS) is largely reduced by 7.1% and 14.7% with a large ΔGdriof 8.3% and 16%, respectively. PSAA incorporating ionizable COOH reduces ΔVdri(11%), compared to that of PS (17%), shown in the second measurement cycle (Figure2d). It is noted that a large ΔVdriof PSAA at the first measurement cycle possibly included the initial equilibration of PSAA with the pH of the solution (Figure S6, Supporting Information). Moreover, the charged components in PSAA schematically shown in Figure2gincreaseGm0(61.1 µS) by 7% compared to PS (56.3 µS). Still, the hydrated structure in PSAA limits pH sensitivity to 5.4 mV per pH with a large ΔGdriand ΔGhysvarying with the pH of solutions (Figure S6, Supporting Information).

ΔVhysobserved by RSM (gray-colored data over Figure2a–d) that immediately started after the end of FSM is related to slow response of additional dipoles to the high, positive gate voltage, and to dipoles already oriented by the FSM at the interface schmatically shown in Figure2h. ΔVhysand ΔGhysare referenced toVthand Gmat FSM, respectively. The confinement of additional dipoles at the interface by RSM increasesGmat RSM of 1.2%, 1.9%, 7.4%, 1.4% for SiO2, HMDS, PS, and PSAA, respectively, indicating high voltage dependency ofGmfrom these evolving interfaces. The most hydrophobic surface was associated with higher ΔVhys(HMDS: 6.8%, PS: 24%, PSAA: 11%, SiO2: 2.2%).

The same measurements were applied for each surface RG above but switching to ACN with lower dipole moment as shown inFigure3a,b; and Figure S7 (Supporting Information). ACN always offers higherGm0than those in pH7 water inferring less influence of ACN dipoles at the interface than pH7 solution (Figure S8, Supporting Information). A large ΔVdriand ΔVhysof SiO2and PSAA shown in pH7 are highly alleviated in ACN (Figure S7, Supporting Information) whileGm0only decreases by 0.6% (w/ΔGdriof 3.1%) for SiO2and 3.4% (w/ΔGdriof 3.7%) for PSAA, respectively. ΔVdriand ΔVhysof PS (25%, 3%) and HMDS (19%, 10%), however, are still pronounced. These systems show unique reversible drift curves: trivial ΔVhysduring drift and increased ΔVhysafter drift (Figure3a,b). This could be interpreted as repeating gate voltage cycles develop orientational ordering of ACN dipoles causing drift which in turn triggered hysteresis as described in Figure2h. After drift, highGm0of PS (64.6 µS) and HMDS (62.7 µS) are further reduced by 3.6% and 6%, respectively. In the summarizedVth0andVsatfor each RG (Figure3c), nonpolar surfaces of PS and HMDS had a similarVth0(PS:1.5 V, HMDS: 1.52 V). Also, theirVsatlevels converged to a specific range (PS: 1.89 V, HMDS: 1.82 V) as was the case in pH7 water. Charged components seem to suppress ΔVhysand ΔVdri(Figure3d). ΔGdriand ΔGhys(Figure3e) seem to arise from unstable dipole orientations at nonpolar surfaces.

Our observations so far, particularly those on ITO compared to the other RG materials and the reduced hysteresis of PSAA compared to PS, give rise to a clear criterion in designing a polymer sensing layer using charged and conductive components for greater electrochemical stability. The positively charged P3HT surface shows highly reduced ΔVdriof 1%, ΔVhysof 0.3% (but initial slight drift inVth), and high stableGm0of 64.3 µS with no ΔGdriand ΔGhys(Figure4a; and Figure S9a, Supporting Information) although the P3HT layer is hydrophobic. PT-COOH proposed for a biosensing layer shows enhanced stability with ΔVdriof 0.01% and no ΔVhys(Figure4b; and Figure S9b, Supporting Information), which is almost comparable to those of ITO (Figure S1d, Supporting Information).

Without any leakage current through the P3HT RG (Figure S10, Supporting Information), reversible pH sensitivity of 17 mV per pH ranging from pH3 to 10 was obtained (Figure4c; and Figure S11a, Supporting Information). This possibly comes from ionic proton doping effects in the amorphous domains of poly-thiophene.[15,20-22]Much higher pH sensitivity of 30 mV per pH (Figure4d; and Figure S11b, Supporting Information) with no ΔGdriand ΔGhysis achieved from of PT-COOH, becoming closer to the pH sensitivity of ITO and about half the Nernstian sensitivity. Enhanced pH response is observed for acidic solutions compared to that of P3HT (Figure4e). For strongly basic solutions from pH9 to 11, fluctuations inVthare observed for both materials (Figure4c,d). Possibly, OH−ions could be reactive with the polythiophene, while some slow equilibration followed an initial penetration of OH−ions.

Our findings are summarized by plotting theVth0(Figure3f) andVsat(Figure3g) of each RG surface in pH7 water. HighVth0of SiO2(1.7 V) and lowVth0of P3HT (1.43 V) reflect the negatively and positively charged surface in pH7 water, respectively. Despite different thicknesses of films (HMDS: < 5 nm, PS: ≈100 nm),Vth0of PS (1.55 V), and HMDS (1.56 V) is in a similar range as was also observed in ACN, indicating that the RGFET mostly translated the interface potentials.[17]SimilarVsatvalues for nonconductive surfaces indicated similar ψsafter drift once initially unstable solvent dipole orientations were equilibrated (Figure3g). Conductive surfaces show insignificant differences betweenVth0andVsat. Also, the trend of ΔVdriand ΔVhysin pH7 water (Figure4h) corresponds to that of ΔGdriand ΔGhys(Figure S12, Supporting Information) as was true in ACN. Finally, high pH sensitivity of PT-COOH (Figure4i) is indicative of the surface accessibility and participation of a significant number density of COOH groups. Such sites could be electronically sensitive anchor points for bioreceptors.

In summary, we investigated how drift and hysteresis varied according to different surface polarities and solution dipole moments in an RGFET system. Fast, stable orientational ordering of dipoles on charged surfaces increased electrochemical stability. Therefore, charged conjugated polymers with physical stability in aqueous solution are recommended for use in biosensing layers. We demonstrated that P3HT and PT-COOH had superior electrochemical stability, almost comparable to that of ITO. Also, the pH sensitivity of P3HT (17 mV per pH) is demonstrated, presumably occurring by ionic doping. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first reported observation of the reversible proton sensitivity of P3HT only in terms of changes in the surface potential of P3HT as a sensing layer on the gate. The pH sensitivity of PT-COOH is further increased due to the incorporation of additional ionizable functionalities (30 mV per pH). Our results suggest a criterion in designing new polymers for biosensing interfaces requiring receptor attachment combining conjugation and charged components in the materials in order to rapidly equilibrate solution dipole moments with the applicatoin ofEF. This criterion is in fact met by poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) polystyrenesulfonate (PEDOT:PSS)[23]and related polymers now used in organic electrochemical transistors, and is now suggested even for sensing layers that interact with analytes purely by polarization mechanisms.

ITO on poly(ethylene terephthalate) (Sigma-Aldrich, 639 303) was sliced (1 × 2 cm) for the RG and was cleaned with isopropanol for 20 min under ultrasonication, rinsed with distilled water for 20 min. A standard RCA cleaning process was applied for the same sized SiO2/Si substrates with 300 nm thickness of oxide. HMDS was deposited on the SiO2substrate via vacuum baking at 120 °C for 2 h and then the samples were sonicated for 15 min in hexane and followed by isopropanol. A solution of 35 mg mL−1of PS was prepared by dissolving the polymer in chloroform. PS was spin coated on the SiO2substrate at 1500 RPM for 1 min. PS/SiO2RG was baked at 120 °C for 2 h for solvent outgassing. PSAA solution was prepared at concentration of 10 mg mL−1in tetrahydrofuran and was spin coated on the SiO2substrate at 1500 RPM for 1 min. PSAA/SiO2RG was baked at 80 °C for 2 h. A concentration of 10 mg mL−1of P3HT and PT-COOH were prepared by dissolving each polymer in chlorobenzene and dimethylformamide, respectively. The prepared solutions were then sonicated for 1 h and then heated at 60 °C overnight for making the polymer fully dissolved, while the PT-COOH required the temperature to be raised to 115 °C for 20 min. P3HT and PT-COOH were then spin coated on SiO2/Si under 1600 RPM for 1 min and 1600 RPM for 5 min, respectively. P3HT/SiO2and PT-COOH/SiO2RG was baked at 80 °C for 2 h. All concentrated solutions were filtered using a hydrophobic PTFE or hydrophilic PTFE syringe filter before spincoating. A commercial FET (CD4007UB) was used as a transducer to investigate fabricated RGs above. Aqueous solution at defined pH or ACN was placed on each RG surface. A Ag/AgCl reference electrode was placed in the solution in order to apply the gate bias for all measurements. All transfer curves were measured by using a Keithley semiconductor analyzer with a drain voltage set at 50 mV and the gate voltage left at double sweep mode. pH sensitivity of each RG surface was evaluated by using standard pH buffer solution.Vthis calculated as the gate voltage corresponding to drain current of 1 µA in each transfer curve.

This work was primarily supported by the National Science Foundation, Division of Materials Research, Biomaterials Program, Grant No. 1807292. The participation of Taein Lee was supported by the National Science Foundation DMREF program, Grant No. 1728947.

The authors declare no conflict of interest.

Please note: The publisher is not responsible for the content or functionality of any supporting information supplied by the authors. Any queries (other than missing content) should be directed to the corresponding author for the article.

Volume6,Issue7

July 2020

1901073

Copyright © 1999-2025John Wiley & Sons, Incor related companies. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence technologies or similar technologies.

Your password has been changed

Enter your email address below.

Please check your email for instructions on resetting your password.
                    If you do not receive an email within 10 minutes, your email address may not be registered,
                    and you may need to create a new Wiley Online Library account.

Can't sign in? Forgot your username?

Enter your email address below and we will send you your username

If the address matches an existing account you will receive an email with instructions to retrieve your username