Fig. 1.Schematic of the sensor at different stages of the fabrication process: (a) initial structure of GaN/AlGaN/GaN onsapphire substrate; (b) after mesa etching process to isolate individual devices; (c) after formation ofcontact electrodesby deposition and patterning of Al/Cr/Au metallic layers; (d) afterRTAannealing to create connection between the electrodes and the 2DEG layer; (e) after SU-8 deposition and patterning for devicepassivationand forming the sensor active area; and (f) after mounting completed device onPCBboard with four Au contact electrodes.

Fig. 2. Device schematics showing (a) cross-section of structure and (b) 3D view of the device after fabrication, membrane deposition and SU-8 encapsulation. Optical images of the sensor (c) after fabrication and (d) after packaging onto the PCB board.

Fig. 3. Response of GaN/AlGaN/GaN devices with calcium selective membrane to changes in Ca2+concentration in a 0.01 M KCl ionic buffer solution. Plot shows sensor output (voltage across sense terminals for constant forcing current of 100 μA) over a time period during which the Ca2+concentration was raised from 10−8M to 10−2M by consecutive additions of CaCl2solution.

Fig. 4. Plot of step change (ΔV = Vbefore Ca2+added- Vafter Ca2+added) versus Ca2+concentration in a 0.01 M KCl interfering ion solution for GaN/AlGaN/GaN devices with Ca2+selective membrane, for four separate experiments with intervals of 4 days between each experiment. An error of approximately 3% is determined based on three times thenoise levelseen in the time vs. voltage series for each set of experiments.

Fig. 5.Plot of equilibrium sensor output represented as effectivegate voltageversus Ca2+ion concentration in 0.01 M KCl, NaCl, MgCl2, LiCl interfering ion solutions (data points). Lines of fit show the non-linearleast squaresfit of this data to the Nikolskii-Eisenman equation. An error of approximately 3% is determined based on three times thenoise levelseen in the time vs. voltage series for each set of experiments.

Table 1.Sensor performance in different ionicstrengthbuffer solution. For KCl and NaCl, it is difficult to fit the data to Nikolskii-Eisenmann equation and in these cases, the estimate of the selectivity coefficient is determined based on the lower detection limit[31].

The spontaneous formation of a two-dimensional electron gas (2DEG) layer at the AlGaN/GaN interface enables device operation without a reference electrode (which can itself be a source of long term instability). Furthermore, relative to silicon, AlGaN/GaN has superior chemical stability, high electron transduction and mobility (Asadnia et al., 2016, 2017). Fig. 2A illustrates the device with an overlying schematic of the sensor layout.

Cookies are used by this site.Cookie Settings

All content on this site: Copyright ©2025or its licensors and contributors. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. For all open access content, the relevant licensing terms apply.

These cookies are necessary for the website to function and cannot be switched off in our systems. They are usually only set in response to actions made by you which amount to a request for services, such as setting your privacy preferences, logging in or filling in forms. You can set your browser to block or alert you about these cookies, but some parts of the site will not then work. These cookies do not store any personally identifiable information.

These cookies enable the website to provide enhanced functionality and personalisation. They may be set by us or by third party providers whose services we have added to our pages. If you do not allow these cookies then some or all of these services may not function properly.

These cookies allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors move around the site.

These cookies may be set through our site by our advertising partners. They may be used by those companies to build a profile of your interests and show you relevant adverts on other sites. If you do not allow these cookies, you will experience less targeted advertising.

Outline

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aca.2017.07.066Get rights and content

Full text access

•We demonstrate reference electrode free AlGaN/GaN transistor-based Ca2+sensors.•Lower detection limit 10−8M and linear response range 10−7–10−2M in KCl and NaCl.•Lowest reported detection limit for reference electrode free Ca2+sensors.•Improved detection limits compared to ISEs in classical setup and previous ISFETs.•These findings are critical forin situapplications of calcium ion sensing.

We demonstrate reference electrode free AlGaN/GaN transistor-based Ca2+sensors.

Lower detection limit 10−8M and linear response range 10−7–10−2M in KCl and NaCl.

Lowest reported detection limit for reference electrode free Ca2+sensors.

Improved detection limits compared to ISEs in classical setup and previous ISFETs.

These findings are critical forin situapplications of calcium ion sensing.

We demonstrate highly selective and sensitivepotentiometricion sensors forcalcium iondetection, operated without the use of a reference electrode. The sensors consist of AlGaN/GaN heterostructure-based transistor devices with chemical functionalisation of the gate area using poly (vinylchloride)-based (PVC) membranes having highselectivitytowards calcium ions, Ca2+. The sensors exhibited stable and rapid responses when introduced to various concentrations of Ca2+. In both 0.01 M KCl and 0.01 M NaCl ionicstrengthbuffer solutions, the sensors exhibited near Nernstian responses with detection limits of less than 10−7M, and a linear response range between 10−7–10−2M. Also, detection limits of less than 10−6M were achieved for the sensors in both 0.01 M MgCl2and 0.01 M LiCl buffer solutions. AlGaN/GaN-based devices for Ca2+detection demonstrate excellent selectivity and response range for a wide variety of applications. This work represents an important step towards multi-ion sensing using arrays of ion-selectivefield effect transistor(ISFET) devices.

Download:Download high-res image (213KB)Download:Download full-size image

The detection ofcalcium ions, Ca2+, is important in a wide range of applications. Calcium is essential for many biological functions such as neural and intracellular signalling,biomineralisation(bone, teeth), muscle action, and many enzymatic processes[1],[2],[3]. Monitoring calciumion concentrationin blood is important as deficiencies can lead to conditions such as muscle and nerve tightening[4]and osteoporosis.Water hardnesscan cause numerous problems in industrial processes and households, with dissolved calcium salts being the primary reason for scaling in pipes and water heaters. Further applications, where the detection of calcium ions can be crucial, include food processing[4],chemical oceanography[5]and agriculture[6],[7].

Atomic absorption spectrometry(AAS) is a traditional method often used for quantifyingcalcium content. However, sample preparation for AAS is tedious (acid digestion). Furthermore, AAS is often expensive, bulky and not suitable forin situreal-time monitoring. In contrast,ion selective electrodes(ISEs) have the advantages of better portability, lower cost, and excellentselectivity[8]. Furthermore, ISEs can be used for the detection of calcium in its biologically active form, Ca2+[9]. Ion selectivefield effect transistors(ISFETs) have further advantages over traditional ISEs, such as higher signal-to-noise ratios, fasterresponse times, and the potential for further miniaturization and integration into systems[10].

ISEs with poly(vinyl chloride) (PVC) based membranes, for the detection of Ca2+ions, have demonstrated detection limits down to 5.0 × 10−7M, linear response ranges between 8.0 × 10−7-1.0 × 10−1M, and stable performance over the pH range of 3.0–11.0[10]. Similar studies using ISFETs for calcium ion detection have also reported comparable results with lower detection limits of 10−6M and sensor lifetimes of up to 6 weeks[11]. The detection limits of Ca2+selective ISFETs can be improved by conditioning the device in solutions containing only interfering ions to achieve zero-current ion flux for subsequent quantification of analyte solutions[12]. The type ofplasticisersused in the membrane matrix can also affect the detection limit for sensors. For example, the use ofo-nitrophenyloctyl ether (o-NPOE) instead of (2-ethylhexyl)sebacate (DOS) can enable detection at much lower concentrations of the analyte of interest[13]. The membranes typically consist of a polymer, a plasticiser, and neutral ion carriers (ionophores) which exhibit strong and selective binding for specific ions. Calcium ionophore ETH 1001 (or((−)-(R,R)-N,N′-Bis-[11-(ethoxycarbonyl)undecyl]-N,N′,4,5-tetramethyl-3,6-dioxaoctane-diamide)) is one of these and has been widely used in clinical and biological settings for Ca2+activity measurement[14],[15]. A solid-state calcium selective electrode using a poly(pyrrole)conducting polymerhas the lowest reported detection limit (2.5 × 10−10M) with linear response between 10−9-10−4M[16]. However, this device, like most ISEs and ISFETs, required a bulky, fragile, and a maintenance-intensive reference electrode with inner filling solution, which hinders long-termin situoperation.

Despite significant advances in ISEs and ISFETs, a stable reference electrode required for the long-term operation of these sensors remains elusive. Liquid junction electrodes, such as Ag/AgCl electrodes, are commonly used as reference electrodes, but suffer from electrode solution leakage that compromises the accuracy and lifetime of the sensor[17]. To date, the best results reported for a sensor operating without a reference electrode are for an ion-selective conductometricmicrosensorthat showed a lower detection limit of 10−7M, and a dynamic range of 10−6-10−1M[9].

ISFETs based on AlGaN/GaN highelectron mobilitytransistor (HEMT) devices present a compelling alternative to conventional Si-based ISFETs, with advantages such as greater chemical stability, higher devicetransconductanceand diminished charging effects[18],[19]. The high transconductance is the result of a 2-dimensionalelectron gaslayer (2DEG) that forms at the AlGaN/GaN interface[20]. Charges on the surface strongly influence the conductivity of the 2DEG layer, thus creating the foundation of a highly sensitive ion sensor[18],[19]. Furthermore, due to their high gain and normally-on channel, AlGaN/GaN HEMT devices do not require a reference electrode, which eliminates the associated issues of instability, bulkiness, short lifetime and drift. Previous studies have showed that AlN/GaN HEMT-based sensors can successfully measure pH in solution without the need for a reference electrode[21]. Further it has previously been demonstrated that AlGaN/GaN devices coated with appropriate functionalisation layers can detect NO3−, PO43−and Hg2+in solution, also without the need of a reference electrode[22],[23],[24],[25].

We have previously reported on Ca2+detection via biological mechanisms using live cells for functionalisation[26]. In this work, we report the performance of AlGaN/GaN HEMT devices functionalised by ion selective PVC-based membranes for Ca2+detection. Performance characteristics of these devices such as optimal dynamic range, Nernstian slope, response time and the selectivity coefficients for a variety of interfering ions were determined.

CalciumionophoreIV/ETH 5234 (orN,N-Dicyclohexyl-N′,N′-dioctadecyl-3-oxapentanediamide),potassiumtetrakis(4-chlorophenyl)borate, 2-nitrophenyl octyl ether and highmolecular weightpoly(vinyl chloride) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich and used without further purification.

We used the optimised formulation suggested by Gehrig et al.[27]which is 10 mg of calcium ionophore IV, 2.8 mg potassium tetrakis(4-chlorophenyl)borate, 658 mg of 2-nitrophenyl octyl ether and 329 mg of highmolecular weightpoly(vinyl chloride) for dissolved in 30 mL THF. A solution micro-deposition system (Vermes MDV 3200) was used to deposit a uniform layer of this material (approximately 10 μm thick) onto the active area of the sensor. The sensor was then placed in a vacuum chamber overnight to remove the solvent (THF) and enhance the adhesion of thepolymeric membraneto the GaN cap layer.

Fig. 1schematically represents the sensors at various stages of fabrication and packaging, prior to functionalisation by membrane deposition. TheHEMTstructure consists of an MOCVD-grown AlGaN/GaN structure (xAl= 0.25; dAlGaN= 15.5 nm) grown on asapphire substrate. A GaN cap layer of 2 nm was also grown to improve the electrochemical stability of the device (Fig. 1a). Hall effect measurements showed a carrier concentration and mobility of the HEMT sample to be 8.257 × 1012cm−2and 1472 cm2/V, respectively. During fabrication the wafer was first cleaned with Technistrip (sonicating for 5 min), then rinsed with isopropanol and DI water. The wafer was then dipped into a solution of aqua regia (HNO3:HCl = 1:3) for 3 min, rinsed with DI water and blown dry with nitrogen followed by a hotplate bake for 5 min at 110 °C. Standardphotolithographywas used for all mask patterning. Mesa isolation was achieved usinginductively coupled plasmareactive ion etching with Cl2/Ar (seeFig. 1b). The contact pads were formed bythermal evaporationof Al (200 nm), Cr (600 nm) and Au (300 nm) followed by lift-off (seeFig. 1c).Rapid thermal annealing(RTA) was used to diffuse the Al through the GaN and AlGaN layers connecting (as shown inFig. 1d) the electrical contacts with the2DEGlayer at the AlGaN/GaN interface. For this step the sample was exposed to 1000 sccm N2in the RTA chamber at 820 °C for 30 s. For devicepassivation, a thick layer of SU-8 (10 μm) was deposited using spin-coating, and patterned usingphotolithographyexposing only the active sensing area on the GaN cap layer (Fig. 1e). Individual devices were then diced and mounted onto a pre-fabricatedprinted circuit board(PCB) with fourelectrode contacts(seeFig. 1f). Conductive epoxy was used to form the connections betweensensor electrodesand contacts on the PCB.Download:Download high-res image (627KB)Download:Download full-size imageFig. 1.Schematic of the sensor at different stages of the fabrication process: (a) initial structure of GaN/AlGaN/GaN onsapphire substrate; (b) after mesa etching process to isolate individual devices; (c) after formation ofcontact electrodesby deposition and patterning of Al/Cr/Au metallic layers; (d) afterRTAannealing to create connection between the electrodes and the 2DEG layer; (e) after SU-8 deposition and patterning for devicepassivationand forming the sensor active area; and (f) after mounting completed device onPCBboard with four Au contact electrodes.

Fig. 2a shows a schematic cross-section of the fabricated sensor with a deposited calcium sensitive membrane on the active area (seeFig. 2b). The dimensions of the active area are 300 × 300 μm.Fig. 2c shows an optical image of the sensor after fabrication andFig. 2d shows an optical image of the AlGaN/GaNISFETdevice after packaging. During the measurements, a source-drain current of 100 μA was maintained using a constant current circuit, whilst the sense terminals were connected to a voltage inputdata acquisition card(National Instruments, model 9239, 24-bit resolution). All the experiments were performed in adark roomenvironment to avoid the effects of light on the AlGaN/GaN device conductivity[28]. To ensure a homogenous solution and equilibrium response, the solution was stirred magnetically.Download:Download high-res image (531KB)Download:Download full-size imageFig. 2. Device schematics showing (a) cross-section of structure and (b) 3D view of the device after fabrication, membrane deposition and SU-8 encapsulation. Optical images of the sensor (c) after fabrication and (d) after packaging onto the PCB board.

After depositing the calcium sensitive membrane onto the active area of the sensor, the membrane was conditioned by immersing the device in 10−2M CaCl2solution for 4 h. The device was then removed and thoroughly rinsed withdeionised waterfor 20 min. The device was then equilibrated for approximately 30 min in an ionicbuffer solutionof KCl without any Ca2+ions. Following this initial conditioning, the device was thoroughly rinsed and soaked in de-ionised water for 20 min. For testing, the device was exposed to solutions of different interfering ions (0.01 M KCl, 0.01 M NaCl, 0.01 M MgCl2and 0.01 M LiCl) until a stable baseline was achieved (about 20–40 min). To test for different concentrations of Ca2+ against the background of interfering ions, at 30 min intervals increasing volumes of 10−1M CaCl2solution were sequentially added by pipette to achieve 10-fold increments in Ca2+concentration from 10−8to 10−2M while continuously stirring (low speed) and monitoring the voltage at the sense terminals. The pH of the solution was not modified through the addition of acidic/basic solutions during these experiments. For comparison the same experiments were performed with an unfunctionalized (bare gate) device.

Fig. 3shows a plot of the sensor output as a function of time as Ca2+was increased in 10-fold increments from approximately 10−8M to 10−2M in 0.01 M KCl solution. The device showed a clear response to the change in Ca2+ions, even at concentrations as low as 10−8M. The reason for the drift and diminished response at the highestanalyte concentrationis unknown, but is likely due to secondary membrane effects such as Donnan exclusion failure[29]. Furthermore, the transient peaks observed in the sensor response, at the instant Ca2+ion is added, may be caused by the disturbance resulting from the introduction of the additional aqueous solution, containing the ions of interest, into the measurement beaker. For the long-term and practical application of these sensors, a different methodology, such as micro-fluidics, could be used for the introduction of ionic solutions.Download:Download high-res image (141KB)Download:Download full-size imageFig. 3. Response of GaN/AlGaN/GaN devices with calcium selective membrane to changes in Ca2+concentration in a 0.01 M KCl ionic buffer solution. Plot shows sensor output (voltage across sense terminals for constant forcing current of 100 μA) over a time period during which the Ca2+concentration was raised from 10−8M to 10−2M by consecutive additions of CaCl2solution.

Fig. 4shows the sensor output vs Ca2+concentration in 0.01 M KClbuffer solutionfor four consecutive exposure sequences at 3-day intervals. The results show minor variability and this is likely due to differing testing conditions (i.e. temperature, light exposure, etc.). Despite this, after accounting for a different offset value for each run, the sensors show a consistent response in a 0.01 M KCl solution over a period of 2 weeks, with a lower detection limit as low as 10−8M in some runs (1st and 3rd), and a linear response range between 10−7M–10−2M, in KCl solution. The worst case (run 4) detection limit was approximately 10−7M. All detection limits were determined using the IUPAC definition of detection limit forelectrochemical sensors[13]. The detection limits for these sensors are, with the exception of run 4, at least one order of magnitude lower than those reported for ISFET or conventionalISEtechnologies as previously referenced[10],[11], and are also the best reported for reference electrode free technology[9]. While it is true that detection limits as low as 10−10M have been reported forISEtechnologies[13], this only occurs when the analyte concentration in the inner solution is moderated between the classical and super-Nernstian responses. However, controlling analyte concentration in an inner solution is inconvenient for on-fieldin situoperation. Finally, although not shown here, the unfunctionalized devices without PVC membrane coating showed a negligible response to Ca2+ions, as expected.Download:Download high-res image (357KB)Download:Download full-size imageFig. 4. Plot of step change (ΔV = Vbefore Ca2+added- Vafter Ca2+added) versus Ca2+concentration in a 0.01 M KCl interfering ion solution for GaN/AlGaN/GaN devices with Ca2+selective membrane, for four separate experiments with intervals of 4 days between each experiment. An error of approximately 3% is determined based on three times thenoise levelseen in the time vs. voltage series for each set of experiments.

The method to obtain apparent changes in the appliedgate voltageand ionselectivitycoefficients in this work has been previously published[22],[24]and is reiterated here for the specific devices under study. Quantitative determination of the selectivity coefficients for these interfering ions requires fitting the Nikolskii-Eisenman equation to the equilibrium sensor response values; but the apparent gate voltage change due to ionsorptioninto the membrane is required before this equation can be used.

The drain-source expression for field effect transistors operating in the non-saturatedtrioderegion can be described using:(1)ID=μCWLVSD((VG−VT)−12VSD2)whereIDis the drain current,μis the channelelectron mobility,Cis capacitance density of the gate,Wis channel width,Lis channel length,VSDis source-drain voltage,VGis gate voltage andVTisthreshold voltage. When drain voltages are very small (VSD≪VG−VT), Eq.(1)is approximated as:(2)ID≈μCWLVSD(VG−VT)

For this study, the current was selected to ensure operation of the device within thelinear regime(triode region).

For ISFETs operated with a reference electrode,IDandVSDare maintained at constant values during sensing measurements. A feedback loop adjusts the potential applied to the reference electrode as a solution-gate for the transistor when thetrans-membrane potential varies withion concentration. This applied potential is the Nernstian response that is typically the output of an ISFET device. For our sensors, operated without a reference electrode, the device is effectively operated as a resistor and the source-drain potential,VSD, is adjusted using a feedback loop to keep the drain current,ID, constant. Changes inVSD, due to exposure of the sensor to different ion concentrations, correspond to changes in channel conductivity and therefore in effective gate bias. Rearranging Eq.(2)shows that when drain current is constant (and selected for the linear regime), the conductance of the sensing layer is proportional to the gate voltage. For the particular structure used in this work (mole fraction ofx= 0.25 for the AlGaN layer anddielectricthicknesses ofdAlGaN= 15.5 nm anddGaN= 2 nm) this relationship between change in the sensing layer conductivity and change in apparent gate voltage is given by:(3)VG−VT(mV)=Gsense(μS)0.687(mF/Vs)

It should be noted that, due to electricalcontact passivationwith SU-8, the measured source-drain voltage (used to determine conductivity) is affected by parasitic current channels. This was not the case for the previous device design for the nitrate and mercury sensors. In this work the channel conductivity was therefore extracted from total conductivity by modelling the parasitic regions as a shunt and access resistance[30].

A linear relationship exists between the conductivity of thetransistor channeland the gate voltage for the transistor device biased to operate in the linear region and hence the equilibrium response data can be represented in terms ofVG−VTby measuring the conductivity of the channel. Forpotentiometricsensors operated with a reference electrode, the relationship between gate voltage and potentiometric response is described by the Nikolskii-Eisenman equation:(4)VG−VT=E0−Rlog(acalcium+K·aionbufferzcalcium/zionbuffer)whereE0is a device constant,Ris potentiometric response slope,Kis the selectivity coefficient,zithe charge number andais theactivity coefficient. The expected Nernstian slope fordivalent ionsis29.7mVper 10-fold change inion concentrationat room temperature. Therefore, the potentiometric response slope and the selectivity coefficients can be determined by fitting the data to Eq.(4).

Fig. 5shows the equilibrium sensor output as a function of Ca2+concentration in solutions containing various interfering ions and selectivity coefficients are summarized inTable 1. These results show that Na+and K+are only weakly interfering ions, while Mg2+and Li+ions affect the response much more significantly. The fitting parameters (response slope) are also given inTable 1and show that a near-Nernstian response was obtained for KCl and NaCl. For MgCl2and LiCl, significant interference was observed and the response is sub-Nernstian. This is due to relatively stronger binding characteristics of these interfering ions with the ionophore[30]. For KCl and NaCl as interfering ions, sensor characteristics showed calcium detection limits of well below 10−7M and a linear response range between 10−7–10−2M. However, for MgCl2and LiCl, the detection limit increased significantly. The selectivity coefficients determined here are slightly poorer compared to values determined by Gehrig et al. using the same ionophore[27]. The reason for this might be attributed to differences in sensor design. Such limits and dynamic range are still relevant for various practical fields such as agriculture, industrial processes andbiomedical applicationsand are the lowest detection limits reported both for ISEs in classical set-up and for any ISFET technology[10],[11], as well as for any reference electrode free operation of sensors for Ca2+ions[9].Download:Download high-res image (213KB)Download:Download full-size imageFig. 5.Plot of equilibrium sensor output represented as effectivegate voltageversus Ca2+ion concentration in 0.01 M KCl, NaCl, MgCl2, LiCl interfering ion solutions (data points). Lines of fit show the non-linearleast squaresfit of this data to the Nikolskii-Eisenman equation. An error of approximately 3% is determined based on three times thenoise levelseen in the time vs. voltage series for each set of experiments.Table 1.Sensor performance in different ionicstrengthbuffer solution. For KCl and NaCl, it is difficult to fit the data to Nikolskii-Eisenmann equation and in these cases, the estimate of the selectivity coefficient is determined based on the lower detection limit[31].Ionic strength buffer solutionSelectivity coefficient log KSelectivity coefficient log K (Ref.[27])Response slope (mV/log10[Ca2+])Linear response range (M)Lower detection limit (M)KCl∼ −3−7.526.410−7–10−210−7NaCl∼ −3−5.927.110−7–10−210−7MgCl2−3.6−4.414.610−5.5–10−210−6LiCl−2.2−5.813.210−5.5–10−210−6

Detection of Ca2+ions by incorporation of anion selective membraneonto an AlGaN/GaN-based transistor device operated without the use of a reference electrode was demonstrated. For KCl and NaCl as interfering ions, sensor characteristics showed calcium detection limits of well below 10−7M (10−8M in the best case) and a linear response range between 10−7–10−2M.

These are the lowest detection limits reported both for ISEs in classical set-up and for any ISFET technology[10],[11], as well as for any reference electrode free operation of sensors for Ca2+ions[9].

Device operation without requiring a reference electrode means that associated issues of stability, maintenance and short lifetimes associated with the reference electrodes are eliminated, and opens up opportunities for miniaturization and system integration. Despite having slightly poorer selectivity coefficients compared to previous studies using the same ionophore, it is still possible that the membrane formulation could be optimised to achieve improved selectivity. Further studies of this technology can be expanded by integrating an array of sensors with membranes of different composition onto a single chip to detect various analytes simultaneously.

Green and Sustainable Membranes: A review2023, Environmental ResearchShow abstractMembranes are ubiquitous tools for modern water treatment technology that critically eliminate hazardous materials such as organic, inorganic, heavy metals, and biomedical pollutants. Nowadays, nano-membranes are of particular interest for myriad applications such as water treatment, desalination, ion exchange, ion concentration control, and several kinds of biomedical applications. However, this state-of-the-art technology suffers from some drawbacks, e.g., toxicity and fouling of contaminants, which makes the synthesis of green and sustainable membranes indeed safety-threatening. Typically, sustainability, non-toxicity, performance optimization, and commercialization are concerns centered on manufacturing green synthesized membranes. Thus, critical issues related to toxicity, biosafety, and mechanistic aspects of green-synthesized nano-membranes have to be systematically and comprehensively reviewed and discussed. Herein we evaluate various aspects of green nano-membranes in terms of their synthesis, characterization, recycling, and commercialization aspects. Nanomaterials intended for nano-membrane development are classified in view of their chemistry/synthesis, advantages, and limitations. Indeed, attaining prominent adsorption capacity and selectivity in green-synthesized nano-membranes requires multi-objective optimization of a number of materials and manufacturing parameters. In addition, the efficacy and removal performance of green nano-membranes are analyzed theoretically and experimentally to provide researchers and manufacturers with a comprehensive image of green nano-membrane efficiency under real environmental conditions.Recent advances in polymeric nanostructured ion selective membranes for biomedical applications2021, TalantaShow abstractNano structured ion-selective membranes (ISMs) are very attractive materials for a wide range of sensing and ion separation applications. The present review focuses on the design principles of various ISMs; nanostructured and ionophore/ion acceptor doped ISMs, and their use in biomedical engineering. Applications of ISMs in the biomedical field have been well-known for more than half a century in potentiometric analysis of biological fluids and pharmaceutical products. However, the emergence of nanotechnology and sophisticated sensing methods assisted in miniaturising ion-selective electrodes to needle-like sensors that can be designed in the form of implantable or wearable devices (smartwatch, tattoo, sweatband, fabric patch) for health monitoring. This article provides a critical review of recent advances in miniaturization, sensing and construction of new devices over last decade (2011–2021). The designing of tunable ISM with biomimetic artificial ion channels offered intensive opportunities and innovative clinical analysis applications, including precise biosensing, controlled drug delivery and early disease diagnosis. This paper will also address the future perspective on potential applications and challenges in the widespread use of ISM for clinical use. Finally, this review details some recommendations and future directions to improve the accuracy and robustness of ISMs for biomedical applications.Recent progress in sensing nitrate, nitrite, phosphate, and ammonium in aquatic environment2020, ChemosphereCitation Excerpt :The spontaneous formation of a two-dimensional electron gas (2DEG) layer at the AlGaN/GaN interface enables device operation without a reference electrode (which can itself be a source of long term instability). Furthermore, relative to silicon, AlGaN/GaN has superior chemical stability, high electron transduction and mobility (Asadnia et al., 2016, 2017). Fig. 2A illustrates the device with an overlying schematic of the sensor layout.Show abstractAquatic chemical sensors have experienced rapid development in recent years largely due to advances in the fields of nanotechnology. Accurate in situ monitoring of nutrients is fundamental to understanding the biogeochemistry of aquatic ecosystems and is necessary for the sustainable utilization of water resources. Although many sensor technologies can achieve nM detection levels, quality assurance and reliability for long-term sensing in complex environments is still lacking. Furthermore, some sensors suffer from sensitivity to high background ion concentration. This review aims to address these challenges by highlighting recent improvements in aquatic chemical sensors to monitor nitrate (NO3−), nitrite (NO2−), ammonium (NH4+), and phosphate (PO43−) ion concentrations in water. The review critically analyses and compares the performance of these chemical sensors with a particular emphasis on their capability for long-term in situ water monitoring. We also provide an overview on some crucial problems significantly affecting the analytical performance of the sensors. Finally, this review details some recommendations and future directions for improving sensing accuracy and robustness.Biosensors for wastewater monitoring: A review2018, Biosensors and BioelectronicsShow abstractWater pollution and habitat degradation are the cause of increasing water scarcity and decline in aquatic biodiversity. While the freshwater availability has been declining through past decades, water demand has continued to increase particularly in areas with arid and semi-arid climate. Monitoring of pollutants in wastewater effluents are critical to identifying water pollution area for treatment. Conventional detection methods are not effective in tracing multiple harmful components in wastewater due to their variability along different times and sources. Currently, the development of biosensing instruments attracted significant attention because of their high sensitivity, selectivity, reliability, simplicity, low-cost and real-time response. This paper provides a general overview on reported biosensors, which have been applied for the recognition of important organic chemicals, heavy metals, and microorganisms in dark waters. The significance and successes of nanotechnology in the field of biomolecular detection are also reviewed. The commercially available biosensors and their main challenges in wastewater monitoring are finally discussed.A self-powered biosensing electronic-skin for real-time sweat Ca<sup>2+</sup> detection and wireless data transmission2019, Smart Materials and StructuresPotentiometric Sensing2019, Analytical ChemistryView all citing articles on Scopus

Green and Sustainable Membranes: A review2023, Environmental Research

Membranes are ubiquitous tools for modern water treatment technology that critically eliminate hazardous materials such as organic, inorganic, heavy metals, and biomedical pollutants. Nowadays, nano-membranes are of particular interest for myriad applications such as water treatment, desalination, ion exchange, ion concentration control, and several kinds of biomedical applications. However, this state-of-the-art technology suffers from some drawbacks, e.g., toxicity and fouling of contaminants, which makes the synthesis of green and sustainable membranes indeed safety-threatening. Typically, sustainability, non-toxicity, performance optimization, and commercialization are concerns centered on manufacturing green synthesized membranes. Thus, critical issues related to toxicity, biosafety, and mechanistic aspects of green-synthesized nano-membranes have to be systematically and comprehensively reviewed and discussed. Herein we evaluate various aspects of green nano-membranes in terms of their synthesis, characterization, recycling, and commercialization aspects. Nanomaterials intended for nano-membrane development are classified in view of their chemistry/synthesis, advantages, and limitations. Indeed, attaining prominent adsorption capacity and selectivity in green-synthesized nano-membranes requires multi-objective optimization of a number of materials and manufacturing parameters. In addition, the efficacy and removal performance of green nano-membranes are analyzed theoretically and experimentally to provide researchers and manufacturers with a comprehensive image of green nano-membrane efficiency under real environmental conditions.

Recent advances in polymeric nanostructured ion selective membranes for biomedical applications2021, Talanta

Nano structured ion-selective membranes (ISMs) are very attractive materials for a wide range of sensing and ion separation applications. The present review focuses on the design principles of various ISMs; nanostructured and ionophore/ion acceptor doped ISMs, and their use in biomedical engineering. Applications of ISMs in the biomedical field have been well-known for more than half a century in potentiometric analysis of biological fluids and pharmaceutical products. However, the emergence of nanotechnology and sophisticated sensing methods assisted in miniaturising ion-selective electrodes to needle-like sensors that can be designed in the form of implantable or wearable devices (smartwatch, tattoo, sweatband, fabric patch) for health monitoring. This article provides a critical review of recent advances in miniaturization, sensing and construction of new devices over last decade (2011–2021). The designing of tunable ISM with biomimetic artificial ion channels offered intensive opportunities and innovative clinical analysis applications, including precise biosensing, controlled drug delivery and early disease diagnosis. This paper will also address the future perspective on potential applications and challenges in the widespread use of ISM for clinical use. Finally, this review details some recommendations and future directions to improve the accuracy and robustness of ISMs for biomedical applications.

Recent progress in sensing nitrate, nitrite, phosphate, and ammonium in aquatic environment2020, ChemosphereCitation Excerpt :The spontaneous formation of a two-dimensional electron gas (2DEG) layer at the AlGaN/GaN interface enables device operation without a reference electrode (which can itself be a source of long term instability). Furthermore, relative to silicon, AlGaN/GaN has superior chemical stability, high electron transduction and mobility (Asadnia et al., 2016, 2017). Fig. 2A illustrates the device with an overlying schematic of the sensor layout.

Citation Excerpt :The spontaneous formation of a two-dimensional electron gas (2DEG) layer at the AlGaN/GaN interface enables device operation without a reference electrode (which can itself be a source of long term instability). Furthermore, relative to silicon, AlGaN/GaN has superior chemical stability, high electron transduction and mobility (Asadnia et al., 2016, 2017). Fig. 2A illustrates the device with an overlying schematic of the sensor layout.

Aquatic chemical sensors have experienced rapid development in recent years largely due to advances in the fields of nanotechnology. Accurate in situ monitoring of nutrients is fundamental to understanding the biogeochemistry of aquatic ecosystems and is necessary for the sustainable utilization of water resources. Although many sensor technologies can achieve nM detection levels, quality assurance and reliability for long-term sensing in complex environments is still lacking. Furthermore, some sensors suffer from sensitivity to high background ion concentration. This review aims to address these challenges by highlighting recent improvements in aquatic chemical sensors to monitor nitrate (NO3−), nitrite (NO2−), ammonium (NH4+), and phosphate (PO43−) ion concentrations in water. The review critically analyses and compares the performance of these chemical sensors with a particular emphasis on their capability for long-term in situ water monitoring. We also provide an overview on some crucial problems significantly affecting the analytical performance of the sensors. Finally, this review details some recommendations and future directions for improving sensing accuracy and robustness.

Biosensors for wastewater monitoring: A review2018, Biosensors and Bioelectronics

Water pollution and habitat degradation are the cause of increasing water scarcity and decline in aquatic biodiversity. While the freshwater availability has been declining through past decades, water demand has continued to increase particularly in areas with arid and semi-arid climate. Monitoring of pollutants in wastewater effluents are critical to identifying water pollution area for treatment. Conventional detection methods are not effective in tracing multiple harmful components in wastewater due to their variability along different times and sources. Currently, the development of biosensing instruments attracted significant attention because of their high sensitivity, selectivity, reliability, simplicity, low-cost and real-time response. This paper provides a general overview on reported biosensors, which have been applied for the recognition of important organic chemicals, heavy metals, and microorganisms in dark waters. The significance and successes of nanotechnology in the field of biomolecular detection are also reviewed. The commercially available biosensors and their main challenges in wastewater monitoring are finally discussed.

A self-powered biosensing electronic-skin for real-time sweat Ca<sup>2+</sup> detection and wireless data transmission2019, Smart Materials and Structures

Potentiometric Sensing2019, Analytical Chemistry

View details