Verification of Operating Principle of Nano Field-effect Transistor Biosensor with an Extended Gate Electrode
Original Article
Published: 18 November 2020
Volume 14, pages 381–389, (2020)
Cite this article
Download PDF
Access provided by Argonne Research Library


BioChip Journal
Aims and scope
Submit manuscript
Verification of Operating Principle of Nano Field-effect Transistor Biosensor with an Extended Gate Electrode
Download PDF
Hye-Lim Kang, Sumi Yoon, Dong-ki Hong, Sunga Song, Young Joo Kim, Won-Hyo Kim, Woo-Kyeong Seong & Kook-Nyung Lee 
571 Accesses

Explore all metrics 

Abstract
Many studies have been conducted on the use of nano field-effect transistor (nanoFET) sensors for the detection of biological species. However, the practical application of nanoFET-based biosensors is difficult because their operating principle has not been clarified. Most existing studies focused on ion concentration and pH level in a solution, the Debye length (the physical distance at which charged particles affect the electric field), and the surface potential of the gate electrode of the nanoFET device. In this study, we verified the operating principle of the nanoFET biosensor with an extended gate electrode and established an equivalent circuit. We experimented using a solution with different pH levels to demonstrate the operating principle of the sensor. Additionally, we analyzed the responses of the device based on the material of the extended gate electrode, the effects of the reference electrode, and the connection configuration of the electrodes. We derived an equivalent circuit to explain how the nanoFET sensor works. The analysis results show that the operating principle of measuring pH or biomolecules depends on the change of the polar capacitor in the liquid-electrode interface on the surface of the sensing electrode. The roles of the reference and extended gate electrodes were clearly explained in this paper. The results of this research will improve the understanding of the operating principle of nanoFET-based biosensors and accelerate the studies for practical biosensor applications of nanoFET devices.

Similar content being viewed by others

Interdigitated Extended Gate Field Effect Transistor Without Reference Electrode
Article 21 October 2016

Review on two-dimensional material-based field-effect transistor biosensors: accomplishments, mechanisms, and perspectives
Article Open access
30 April 2023

Biosensors Based on Field-Effect Transistors
Chapter © 2019
Introduction
Various studies have been conducted on a nano field-effect transistor (nanoFET) based-biosensor as such nanoFET devices can perform real-time and label-free detection of biomarker molecules1–8. Recently, a nano-FET sensor with an extended gate electrode has been actively studied to overcome their limitations, such as low sensitivity and narrow detection range owing to a small sensing area. The gate of such a nanoFET device is electrically connected with a large-area electrode located outside the device. The nanoFET sensor with an extended gate electrode is not directly exposed to the solution in biomolecules detection, and thus, stable operation of the sensors is achieved9–13. The target material is detected by a nanochannel field effect as the electric potential change of the extended gate electrode is the same as that of the gate of the nanoFET channel. This configuration can provide a large sensing area and increase the probability of the adsorption events of a target molecule, thereby improving detection sensitivity. Some studies have been conducted to detect biomarkers using an extended gate electrode made of a broad range of materials such as tin oxide, indium tin oxide, zinc oxide, and palladium oxide9,11,14–16. Various electrode materials are studied to selectively detect specific biomarkers in a complex environment. In a complex environment with biomaterials, the conductivity of nanochannel on the device is affected by many parameters such as ion concentration, the potential change of the solution, Debye length, and surface potential of the gate electrode. Therefore, it is important to distinguish the real signal of the target biomarker from the noise of other parameters and to demonstrate the practical applications of the biosensor. However, the detection characteristics on the material of the extended gate electrode and the operating principle of a nanoFET device with an extended gate electrode remain unclear. Herein, to verify the operating principle, we analyzed the pH response by simplifying the environment in an experiment. The surface of the sensing electrode in the nano-FET device is protonated or deprotonated when the hydrogen ion concentration of the solution changes; hence, the surface potential and the conductivity of the nanochannel also change17,18. We elucidate the operating principle of a nanoFET with an extended gate electrode and rebuild the equivalent circuit model by noting the change in capacitance between the sample and sensing electrode surface. A clear understanding of the principle of the nanoFET biosensors is essential for practical applications of the nanoFET biosensor technology.

In this study, we analyzed the detection characteristics of a nanoFET device based on the material of the extended gate electrode measuring pH responses. Furthermore, the effect of a reference electrode was examined during the pH measurement on the solution of a nanoFET device with an extended gate electrode. A reference electrode maintains a constant potential between the solution and itself by equilibrating the redox reaction in the electrolyte solution6,19. The pH detection characteristics were analyzed based on the difference in the connection configuration by changing the locations of the reference and extended gate electrodes. We clearly established the role of the reference electrode in the experiment by using the same materials for both the electrodes.

Based on the above analysis, we established a new equivalent circuit model of the nanoFET biosensor with an extended gate electrode and clearly explained the effect and operating principle of the reference and extended gate electrodes in a nanoFET biosensor. We demonstrated that it is impossible to monitor the pH change of the solution in direct contact with the surface of the extended gate electrode of nanoFET if there is no closed-circuit connection configuration that ensures that the potential of the solution is constant. Moreover, we found that inducing an electric field effect on the sensing electrode through electrostatic force by the charge of the biological species in the solution does not change the conductivity of the nano-channel. The conductivity of the nanochannel changes due to the change in the potential of the sensing gate which is caused by interface capacitance between the solution and the sensing electrode. We also observed a case where the device or the gates of the device are in direct contact with the solution using a nanoFET device without an extended gate electrode. They can be simplified as an equivalent circuit with a parallel or series connection of capacitors modeling the solution interfaces with drain/source and gate electrodes to drive the FET device.

Results and Discussion
pH Sensitivity Depending on the Material of Extended Gate Electrode and Gate Bias Voltage
Figure 1(a) shows the real-time response of the nano-FET sensor with three different extended gate electrode materials with respect to the pH of the solution. From Figure 1, the current in the nanochannel (Ids) increases as the pH increases from 4 to 9, which behaves like a p-type ion-sensitive field-effect transistor (ISFET). The Au electrode exhibited very low pH response, whereas Si/SiO2 and indium tin oxide (ITO) electrodes exhibited a relatively high pH response. This suggests that an oxide film on the surface of the sensing electrode provides an excellent response characteristic to changes in the pH. Figures 1(b), (c), and (d) show a comparison of the measurement results of the I–V curve, and real-time measurements in the Ids of the nanoFET device connected to the ITO extended gate electrode to changes in the pH of the solution. It should be noted that the magnitudes of variations in Ids at two different reference voltage (Vref) values in real-time measurements are similar to the I–V curve shift results at the corresponding Vref values. In other words, variations in Ids for real-time pH response can be obtained from the I–V curve shift. Therefore, the gate bias voltage applied to the device in the realtime measurements can be obtained from the I-V curve and set as an appropriate value.

Figure 1
figure 1
pH response characteristics of the nanoFET device connected to different extended gate electrode material: (a) Real-time pH response result of different electrode materials of the extended gate electrode; (b) I–V curve shift of the nanoFET sensor with an ITO extended gate electrode to the pH 4, 7, and 9, respectively; (c) Real-time response to the pH of the solution when a bias voltage of -2.5 V was applied to the reference electrode; (d) Real-time response to the pH of the solution when a bias voltage of -1.8 V was applied to the reference electrode. In (b), (c), (d) the nanoFET device is connected to the ITO extended gate electrode.

Full size image
pH Response Characteristics to the Connection Arrangement of the Reference Electrode and Extended Gate Electrode
Figure 2(a) shows the I–V curve shift to different pH solutions on the ITO extended gate electrode with no reference electrode connection. It also includes the I–V curve without the solution on the extended gate electrode that is connected to the top gate of the nano-FET device and is in the electrically floating state. The I–V characteristics were measured by voltage sweep of the bottom gate (Vbg). Additionally, the sweeping voltage or bias voltage applied to the bottom gate for I–V measurement can generate a capacitive coupling effect at the top gate electrode. The top gate and the bottom gate of the nanoFET device are a parallel electrode capacitor with a buried oxide layer (BOX) insulator. The results show large I–V shifts, which indicates that the I-V characteristics are independent of the pH value. In other words, the I–V shift was affected by an arbitrary potential value of the extended gate electrode, and the I–V measurement does not represent the surface potential caused by protonation or deprotonation induced by the pH solution on the sensing electrode surface.

Figure 2
figure 2
pH response characteristics of the nanoFET sensor to the connection of the reference electrode and the extended gate electrode: (a) I–V measurement of the nanoFET sensor when the extended gate electrode is ITO and no reference electrode; (b) I–V shift to pH when Vref is connected to Ag/AgCl electrode and the extended gate electrode is ITO; (c) I–V shift to pH when the ITO electrode is connected to Vref and the extended gate electrode is Ag/AgCl electrode. (d) I–V measurement to the pH when both the reference and extended gate electrodes are ITO.

Full size image
Figure 2(b) and 2(c) show the pH responses of the nanoFET device with exchanging the material of the extended gate electrode and the reference electrode to identify behaviors of the sensor by the connection configuration of the electrodes. Figure 2(b) shows that the surface potential of the extended gate electrode interfaced with the solution makes the I–V shift to the right of the p-type nanoFET device as the pH value increases. In Figure 2(c), despite the increase in pH value, the I–V shifts to the left when the extended gate electrode is Ag/AgCl. However, the electrode potential of Ag/AgCl in the solution is constant regardless of the change in pH, whereas that of the ITO in contact with the solution connected to the Vref shifts the I–V to the opposite direction of the p-type nanoFET device according to increase in pH. Notably, when exchanging the ITO and the Ag/AgCl electrodes to the extended gate electrode and the reference electrode in the pH response, the I–V of the p-type nanoFET device shifts to the opposite. Therefore, we can conclude that the nanoFET sensor with an extended gate electrode operates with a gate potential value determined by voltage division to reference electrode, and not by the surface potential of the electrode in the solution. Moreover, we can represent the surface potential on the electrode induced in the interface of the solution as a polar capacitor.

Figure 2(d) shows the response to change in pH of the solution when we use the ITO electrode for both the extended gate electrode and the reference electrode. The top and the bottom gate of the nanoFET device were connected to the extended gate electrode, and the response of the device to the change in pH was measured using the sweeping Vref of the reference electrode. Although the pH of the solution changed, no I–V curve shift appeared. Therefore, this indicates that the gate potential of the nanoFET device remains constant regardless of pH change even though protonation or deprotonation occurs on the ITO electrode surface because of the change in pH. Since the same surface potential change occurs on the surface of the reference electrode as well as that of the extended gate electrode, the change of the surface potential cancels each other out in the connection of Vref to the nanoFET device. From the result, it is evident the potential of the gate electrode is not affected by the pH change of the solution when the materials of the extended gate electrode and the reference electrode are the same.

In other words, the electric potential of the gate electrode of the nanoFET device with an extended gate electrode is the divided potential level of the Vref applied to the reference electrode through the solution. The interface of the solution and the electrode surface generates the difference in electrode potential in the electrolyte buffer solution, which is varying in pH. To explain the results of I–V shifts of p-type device induced by the pH response as shown in Figure 2(b) and (c), we can model the electrode potential change in pH solution of the extended gate electrode as a polar capacitance change. Moreover, the connection of two identical polar capacitors between the gate electrode and the Vref cannot cause I–V shifts of the nanoFET device even with a change in pH. However, it corresponds to the experimental result where the ITO electrodes are used as both the extended gate electrode and the reference electrode, as shown in Figure 2(d). The electrical surface potential of the extended gate electrode in contact with the solution does not cause a change in the electrical potential of the gate electrode by itself. Additionally, it is hard to observe with the nanoFET device if the net amount of electrostatic charges does not change in the solution, as shown in Figure 2(a). Therefore, the electrical connection of the reference electrode and the extended gate electrode of the nanoFET device is required.

The interface capacitance between the solution and the electrode surface is like a polar capacitor whose capacitance varies by the surface potential induced by the pH of the solution or the adsorption of the charged protein molecules. This indicates that the change in capacitance between the solution and the surface of the sensing electrode or variation in polar capacitance induces an electric field-effect on the nanoFET device, rather than the electrostatic force by the adsorbed charged protein molecules on the sensing electrode. Consequently, to detect protein molecules using nanoFET biosensors, the capacitance change of the interface between the solution and sensing electrode should be considered rather than the issue of Debye length. Therefore, it can be concluded that detection using a nanoFET device is accurate only when the capacitance between the solution and the surface of the sensing electrode changes owing to the adsorption of protein molecules, while the surface potential of the reference electrode remains constant. Notably, it means that the interference generated by ion concentration and the pH of the electrolyte buffer solution does not affect the nanoFET device. Moreover, the change in ion concentration and the pH of the solution cancel each out if the reference electrode and the sensing electrode is the same owing to the circuit connection of the gate bias voltage, Vref. Thus, the detection will not be affected by interferences from an environment.

Equivalent Circuits to Explain the Operation of nanoFET Sensor
As shown in Figure 3(a), an equivalent circuit can be represented by the serial connection of polar capacitors formed in the interfaces between the reference electrode and the solution, the extended gate electrode and the solution, and the metal-oxide-semiconductor (MOS) capacitor of the nanoFET device. The electrodes interfaced with the solution represent a polar capacitor whose potential difference depends on the electrode potential in the solution. Since the electrode potential of Ag/AgCl remains constant and that of ITO extended gate electrode varies with the pH of the solution, the explanation on detection of pH change utilizing the equivalent circuit model is well consistent with the experimental results.

Figure 3
figure 3
Equivalent circuit model: (a) equivalent circuit model of the nanoFET sensor with an extended gate electrode; (b) schematic of the bias voltage connection of the nanoFET sensor with no extended gate electrode outside; (c) equivalent circuit model of the nanoFET sensor with no extended gate electrode outside of the device substrate.

Full size image
As shown in Figure 3(b), the source/drain or bottom substrate electrode can produce an interface capacitor between the solution and the surface of an insulating layer by applying the bias voltage to drive the device if the nanoFET device is in direct contact with the solution. The interfaces of the solution with each electrode of the nanoFET device should be represented by interface capacitors connected in parallel according to the electrode potential. Therefore, the interface capacitance of each insulator surface and the solution can be varied with the pH, and the surface potential of the gate electrode of the nanoFET device in contact with the solution is affected by the connection of bias voltage driving the device. That is, the gate electrode is not in the floating state even though no further reference electrode connection is present, unlike the extended gate electrode configuration. The equivalent circuit is shown in Figure 3(c). Through the insulator layer, the source, drain, and bottom substrate gate electrodes, including the reference electrode are in contact with the electrolyte buffer solution; this configuration can be represented as liquid-electrode interface capacitors connected in parallel and can affect the solution potential. The interface between the top gate, which is the floating sensing gate on the nanoFET device, and the buffer solution is represented by a capacitor, and the change in the potential of the top gate and the bottom substrate gate can cause a change in the Ids. Therefore, a change in pH or ion concentration in a structure where the solution sample is in direct contact with the device substrate may result in a change in Ids with or without the reference electrode, and the magnitude of change depends only on the characteristics of the liquid-electrode surface interface. As shown in the equivalent circuit, the I–V of the device may shift towards the pH regardless of the reference electrode. However, the pH sensitivity of the solution may be affected by the sensing electrode material’s characteristics when Ag/AgCl wire is used as the reference electrode.

In conclusion, the divided potential level of the bias voltage applied to the liquid on the gate electrode, which is determined from the serial connection of the polar capacitors of the electrodes interfaced with the liquid, produces the field-effect on the nanochannel. Surface protonation of the gate electrode in the pH solution does not produce chemical gating directly in the nanoFET device. Herein, the change in surface potential of the gate electrode interfaced with the solution by the pH, or the adsorption of charged biomolecules can contribute to the potential change of the gate electrode by dividing the bias voltage applied. That is, the protein molecular charge on the surface of the sensing electrode does not directly induce electric field effect in the nanochannel by the electrostatic force by itself. The polarizing potential between the solution and the surface of the sensing electrode because of the adsorption of the protein molecules changes the potential of the gate electrode. This is different from the case that charged particles in the air are directly adsorbed at the gate electrode, which increases the total charge in the gate electrode20–23.

Conclusions
In this study, we conducted a pH response experiment on a nanoFET biosensor with an extended gate electrode to elucidate the operating principle of the sensor. Additionally, to explain the operating principle of the nanoFET sensor, we proposed an equivalent circuit model. The operating principle of the nanoFET sensor was clarified via analyzing the serial connection of the electrodes interfaced with the solution to the gate bias voltage. The sensor does not exhibit pH detection capability when the solution is electrically floating without the reference electrode. Experimental results show that when the same electrode material is used for both the extended gate electrode and the reference electrode, they do not respond to changes in the pH. We showed that the ISFET operates by changing the polarity of the polar capacitors on the electrodes interfaced with the solution connected in series to the gate bias voltage. To verify the operation of the ISFET experimentally, we comprehensively analyzed the results for the connection configuration of the reference and the extended gate electrode as well as the gate electrode materials. The mechanism of the nanoFET sensor to detect the pH and biomolecules in a solution can explain as the equivalent circuit of the polar capacitors connected in series with the gate of the nanoFET device. The electrodes in contact with the solution are modeled as a polar capacitor and the polarity change is induced by the pH changes, or the adsorption of biomolecules on the surface of the sensing electrode in the solution, thereby enabling detection operation.

The equivalent circuit model of the conventional ISFET device was rearranged based on the experimental results of the pH detection operation of the nanoFET device with an extended gate electrode. It should be noted that the surface protonation by pH or adsorption of the charged biomolecules does not induce direct electric field-effect on the nanochannel electrostatically. However, the adsorption of biological species on the gate electrode or surface protonation by pH is observed by regarding the electrode surface-solution interface as a polar capacitor. Future studies need to focus on how to make the selective adsorption of target biomolecules maximize the electric potential change of the sensor electrode interfaced with the solution, as represented in the established equivalent circuit model for practical application of a nanoFET biosensor.

Materials and Methods
nanoFET Device and Extended Gate Electrode Configuration
The nanoFET device was fabricated using silicon on insulator substrate, and the thickness, length, and width of the nanochannel were 20 nm, 5 µm, and 1 µm, respectively. The nanochannel has two gate electrodes, namely, a bottom substrate gate and a top gate below and above the nanochannel, respectively. The thicknesses of the bottom substrate and the top gate oxide films are 100 nm and 20 nm, respectively. The detailed fabrication process can be found in previous work by the authors20. The bottom substrate gate and the top gate are electrically connected to each other through wire bonding with an extended gate electrode outside the device. Therefore, because of the dualgate structure, the I–V characteristic of the nanoFET device is superior to that of a device in which only the top gate or the bottom gate is used. Figure 4 shows a cross-sectional view of the nanoFET device and the connection configuration of the extended gate electrode. The extended gate electrode is a sensing area that is in direct contact with the sample solution. In addition, it can be easily interconnected to the gate of the nanoFET device and changed to the desired material while using the same nanoFET device. An Ag/AgCl wire was used to apply the reference voltage to the solution on the sensing area.

Figure 4
figure 4
Cross-sectional view and pH experiment schematic of a nanoFET device with an extended gate electrode.

Full size image
pH Response Characteristics to the Material of the Extended Gate Electrode
The pH response experiment of the nanoFET with the extended gate electrode was conducted as shown in Figure 4. In the experiment, only one nanoFET device was used, the extended gate electrode was changed to several materials in order to compare the pH response depending on the material of the sensing electrode. A gold electrode on printed circuit board, Si/SiO2 substrate, ITO glass were used as the extended gate electrode, and the sensitivity of pH detection was compared depending on the materials of the electrode. Microwells were made on the extended gate electrode using Teflon tapes to maintain a constant contact area for the sensing electrode with the solution. Ids of the nanoFET was measured while the pH was changed to 4, 7, and 9. The source/drain voltage was 0.5 V, whereas the Vref was maintained at -2.5 V to control the potential of the solution.

Arrangement of the Reference Electrode and Extended Gate Electrode
To verify how the surface potential of extended gate electrode induces the field effect on the nanoFET device with a varying pH, we designed and investigated several connection configurations of the gate of the device, the extended gate electrode, and the reference electrode. Figure 5 illustrates the four ways of connecting the extended gate electrode to the gate electrode of the nanoFET device. Figure 5(a) represents the case in which the reference electrode is not used, and the ITO electrode is connected to the top gate of the nanoFET device. The solution is electrically floating, and the I–V characteristics are measured by sweeping the voltage applied to the bottom gate electrode. Figures 5(b) and 5(c) represent cases where the Ag/AgCl electrode and the ITO electrode connections are exchanged. The electrodes are alternately used as the reference and the extended gate electrode, respectively. Figure 5(d) represents the ITO electrode used as the reference electrode, which is the same electrode material with the extended gate electrode. The arrangement will clarify how the surface potential of the extended gate electrode directly connected to the nanoFET gate induced by the varying pH affects the nanochannel.

Figure 5
figure 5
Comparison of four cases of electrode connection of nanoFET device, extended gate electrode and reference electrode; (a) no use of reference electrode, (b) and (c) connection exchange of Ag/AgCl electrode and ITO electrode for the reference electrode and extended gate electrode, (d) ITO electrode used as the reference electrode instead of Ag/AgCl electrode.

