Syed Mubeen

Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of California, Santa Barbara, California 93106, USA

Corresponding Author

Martin Moskovits

Give access

Share full-text access

Use the link below to share a full-text version of this article with your friends and colleagues.Learn more.

Share a link

Surface chemical processesoccurring on a Pd-nanoparticle-decorated tin oxide (SnO2) nanowire configured as a field-effect transistor (FET) can be strongly influenced by the gate potential if a high dielectric constant material is used as the gate oxide. Dramatic changes in channel currents are produced as a consequence when the device is exposed to hydrogen while operated in its depletion region, providing an example of gate-potential directed surface chemistry.

A single semiconducting nanowire whose surface has been decorated with metal nanoparticles and configured as the channel in a field-effect transistor can function as a miniature laboratory with which to investigate chemical processes occurring at the surfaces both of the metal nanoparticles and of the semiconductor and their effect on the electronic and transport properties of the device, and reciprocally how the transfer characteristics of the FET influence the chemistry occurring at the device’s surface.1These effects, negligibly small at the surfaces of ordinary materials systems, are enormously amplified when the FET’s channel is a nanowire with a large surface-to-volume ratio so that the nanowire’s radius is comparable to, or smaller than the material’s Debye screening length, and a small change in gate voltage can dramatically affect the carrier density in the entire channel.2-8

In this study, we demonstrate how processes occurring at the surface of a tin oxide (SnO2) nanowire configured as a field-effect transistor (FET) can be influenced by the gate potential. The chemical processes studied are the reactions that occur on the oxide’s surface, when the material is exposed to hydrogen atoms produced locally by the catalytic dissociation of diatomic hydrogen on Pd nanoparticles deposited directly on the nanowire.9-12These hydrogen atoms can react at a variety of surface sites and potentially diffuse into sub-surface regions of the nanowire thereby creating donor states, that can potentially increase the electron density. All of these processes are dramatically affected by the electrostatic fields produced by varying the device’s gate voltage. The effect of gate bias was enhanced by using ALD-deposited alumina as the gate oxide. The greater dielectric constant (over that of silica) and low leakage current allowed gate oxide thicknesses to be significantly reduced thereby very much increasing the gate to channel fields.13,14As a consequence (and as a result of the catalytic effect of the Pd nanoparticles) the device’s hydrogen detection sensitivity was increased by several orders of magnitude. Finally, the dependence of the carrier density in the SnO2-NW on the partial pressure of the ambient H2, and on the gate potential, were used to speculate on the nature of the defects that contribute to the conductivity of tin oxide, which, despite its large bandgap, is a rather conductive n-type semiconductor.

Single crystalline tin oxide nanowires were grown by chemical vapor deposition as described previously (see Experimental Section).15-17The morphology of the 1D SnO2nanowires was verified by scanning electron microscopy (FEI Sirion XL30-FEG) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM). The device consists of a SnO2nanowire ∼60 nm in diameter and several micrometers long deposited on 50nm thick Al2O3film grown on a pre-cleaned heavily doped p-type Si wafer (Boron doped, 0.02 Ω cm) (Figure1a). Alumina was selected as gate dielectric because its high dielectric constant (∼9.0) results in efficient charge injection into and withdrawal from the transistor channel with acceptably low leakage currents.13Nanowires were transferred to the Si wafer by gently pressing the nanowire-covered growth substrate onto the Al2O3/Si substrate. The density of the resulting transferred nanowires can be controlled by altering the contact pressure. Metallic Ti/Au (50/250 nm) were vapor deposited as source and drain electrodes to minimize the Schottky barrier at the contacts.1To minimize contamination, no wet processes were employed at any stage of device fabrication. Isolated individual tin oxide nanowires were identified and used for further measurements. SEM imaging indicates that in a typical synthesis, the diameters of SnO2nanowires ranged between ∼40 and ∼70 nm and one hour growth typically yields nanowires with lengths in the range 70–100 μm, long enough to bridge the 15 μm source-drain electrode gap (Figure1b).

(a) Schematic of the metal-nanoparticle decorated single SnO2nanowire FET sensor and its operation. The source drain current (ID) is measured by applying a constant source drain bias voltage (VD) and sweeping the back gate voltage (VG). (b) SEM image of a representative individual SnO2nanowire device spanning a pair of ohmic metal contact pads. (c) High magnification SEM image of Pd nanoparticle-decorated SnO2nanowire showing good coverage of well isolated Pd nanoparticles on SnO2NW surface. (d) Gate dependentI–Vcharacteristics of a Pd-nanoparticle decorated SnO2NWFET. VGfor eachI–Vcurve was changed from –3 to +2 V in steps of 1 V. (e) Typical transfer characteristics of SnO2NW (black) and Pd-nanoparticle decorated SnO2NW (red) source drain current as a function of back gate voltage measured in 1sccm dry air under a constantVD= 0.5 V. All electrical measurements were carried out at 100 °C.

Following the fabrication of the single-nanowire FET, palladium nanoparticles (1 nm mass thick) was deposited on the device using e-beam evaporation. In carrying out Pd deposition a shadow mask was appropriately placed so that each device set contained both pristine and Pd-decorated SnO2nanowire samples. Finally, all samples were annealed in a nitrogen atmosphere at 300 °C to improve Ohmic contact between nanowire and metallic micropads and also to induce the palladium metal film to break up and aggregate into well-spaced Pd nanoparticles (Figure1c). SEM images indicate that the diameters of the palladium nanoparticles were in the range of 4–10 nm. All current-voltage measurements were carried out on isolated individual nanowires in a custom-built chamber in which the temperature, pressure and gas composition could be varied. Gas compositions in the 3–900 mTorr range were controlled by mass flow meters.

Prior to subjecting the device to H2gas, the devices were characterized byI–Vmeasurements to ensure the Ohmic character of the device’s contacts and that it otherwise functions as an FET.I–Vmeasurements were carried out in a three- terminal configuration at 100 °C with and without Pd nanoparticles decorating the surface of the nanowires. The device and measurement apparatus were carefully shielded and grounded to minimize electronic noise. Figure1d shows a typical set ofID–VDcharacteristics obtained at 100 °C for Pd-decorated tin oxide nanowire exposed to 1 sccm dry air. The applied drain voltage (VD) is swept from 0 to 3 V and the gate voltage (VG) is stepped from –3 to +2 V in 1 V steps. TheID–VDcurves exhibit clear linear and saturation regions with saturation arising from the local depletion of carriers around the drain electrode.18-20Figure1e shows typical transfer characteristics (ID–VG) of the SnO2NW-FET with and without Pd nanoparticle decoration atVD= 0.5 V and gate voltages (VG) swept between -5 to 5 V. Only very modest hysteresis was observed over this gate potential range; and leakage currents were lower or comparable to the off-state current of the nanowire channel (Figure S1).

The positive shift in the threshold voltage, and the decrease in slope observed in theID–VGtraces on decorating the SnO2-NW with Pd (in the absence of hydrogen) indicates, respectively, a small decrease in the carrier concentration and in carrier mobility. The Pd-NP decorated SnO2NWFETs had the following characteristics:S= 1.1 V dec−1,Ion/Ioffratio = 1 × 103andVT= -2.0 V and a maximumμof 2 cm2V−1S−1, 3.5-fold lower than for the pristine SnO2nanowire.

Figure2a shows typicalID(VG) curves plotted in semi-log scale for a Pd decorated SnO2NWFET at 100 °C exposed to varying hydrogen partial pressures in dry air corresponding to concentrations ranging from 10 ppm to 2500 ppm. The H2was entrained in a 1 sccm background stream of dry air. When the Pd-decorated SnO2nanowire biased at 0.5 V was exposed to hydrogen, the threshold voltage shifted negatively dramatically. With a H2concentration of 100 ppm, the change in transconductance was calculated to be∼4 nS/V in the linearIDversusVGregion; where. In contrast, exposing a Pd-free tin oxide nanowire to even the highest hydrogen doses produced little or no change in the device’s threshold voltage of its transconductance (Figure S2).

(a) Effect of hydrogen partial pressure on the measured transfer characteristics of Pd-nanoparticle decorated SnO2nanowire. Prior to each measurement, the device was subjected to desired concentration of hydrogen gas under a continuous background flow of dry air stream for at least 30 min. (b) Measured threshold voltage (red dots) as a function of the square root of the hydrogen partial pressure. The data was fit to. The solid black line represents a linear fit to the data. (c) Real time conductance (G(t)) response of Pd-nanoparticle decorated SnO2NW plotted as a function of back gate voltage towards 2500 ppm hydrogen introduced into a background of dry air stream for 2 min, then shutting the hydrogen off. (d) Fit of two exponentials to the H2on and one exponential to the H2off portions of the current response of the device to 2500 ppm H2at constant back gate voltage = +2 V. All above measurements were carried out under a constant source drain bias voltage of 0.5 V.

The carrier concentrations deduced from the measured threshold voltages of pristine and Pd-decorated SnO2-NW FETs under various levels of hydrogen gas exposure are summarized inTable1. Pd decoration produces a drop in carrier concentration from 1.7 × 1018cm−3to 1.3 × 1018cm−3. This is expected.15The Pd-SnO2Schottky junction formed produces a charge depletion layer that constricts the effective conduction channel in the vicinity of the junction. Exposing the Pd-decorated NW to H2, however, resulted in dramatic changes in carrier concentration, as one can surmise by inspection from the large negative shifts in the device’s threshold voltage (Figure2a). One possible reason for this is the reversal of the Schottky charge depletion resulting from the increase of the Pd nanoparticles’ work function on their exposure to hydrogen. The catalytic dissociation of H2to H atoms and their subsequent incorporation into the Pd crystallites forms a mixture of Pd and Pd-hydride phases with increases significantly the particles’ work functions. However, modulation of the Schottky junction can only be a minor contributor since the increase in the (Pd-decorated) nanowire’s carrier concentration resulting from H2exposure greatly exceeds the decrease that resulted from the formation of the Schottky junction in the absence of H2. (The formation of the Schottky junction decreased the overall carrier concentration in the nanowire by ∼22% (Table1), whereas exposure to 1000 ppm and 2500 ppm of H2increased the carrier concentration by factors of 4.5 and 7, respectively.)

We previously conjectured that the spillover of catalytically produced H atoms onto a tin-oxide nanowire contributed to its carrier concentration but did not prove this definitively since those devices showed very small gate voltage dependences.15By contrast, the data extracted from the transfer characteristics (Figure2a) prove conclusively that the large carrier density increases could only arise from the interaction of H atoms with the tin oxide, which implies facile spillover following catalytic dissociation of H2on the Pd nanoparticles. A further requirement (discussed in detail below) is that the H atoms create H-based species either on the surface, or in the bulk of the tin oxide associated with either more abundant and/or more easily ionizable donor states. One underscores, in passing, that H2gas is rather ineffective in creating these donor states, as the modest increase in carrier density when pristine SnO2was exposed to H2indicates. Rather, SnO2requires a source of H atoms for abundant H-based ionizable defects to form. Hence, the ubiquity of H2in laboratory environments seems to be an insufficient condition to account for the proposed existence of significant levels atomic H defects in SnO2.25

The carrier density in the Pd-decorated SnO2-NW was found to depend linearly on the square root of the H2partial pressure (Figure2b). This is consistent with the proposition that each additional conduction electron derives from one H atom.

From the transfer characteristics shown in Figure2a it is clear that the device is maximally sensitive as a hydrogen sensor for gate voltage values of about –3 to –2 V, which is in the device’s depletion region. AtVG= –3V the device’s sensitivity to hydrogen is unprecedented: its source-drain current changes by a factor 7500 when the device is exposed to 2500 ppm of H2partial, which contrasts dramatically with the 60-fold increase in current observed for the same level of H2exposure at zero gate bias. This demonstrates vividly the potential benefit of using the full range of capabilities of a single-nanowire FET sensor over conductometric sensors. Very similar results were obtained with two other devices fabricated and measured independently.

Figure2c summarizes the observed time-dependent changes in source-drain current (expressed as conductance) at various values of the gate voltage, following the exposure of a Pd-decorated SnO2-NW to 2500 ppm ambient H2in dry air for 2 min, then for 5 min after the H2was shut off. On turning on the H2flow, the source-drain current increases precipitously, then levels off to a plateau. The magnitude of the initial current jump is strongly gate-potential sensitive. AtVG= –2 V the current initially increases by a factor of over 250. At VG= +2 V the initial increase is only a factor ∼2, which likely reflects a second, slower dynamical process occurring after the initial very rapid reaction responsible for the large current step observed atVG= –2 V. AtVG= +2 V the kinetics following exposure to 2500 ppm H2can be reproduced using two exponentials: a relatively rapid process with a rate constant ∼13 s−1and a slower process with a rate constant ∼0.12 s−1(Figure2d). On halting the H2(but not the dry air) flow (atVG= +2 V) the source-drain current immediately begins to decrease. A single exponential with rate constant ∼0.44 s−1is able to account for the observed decrease which restores the source-drain current of the device to its initial value after approximately 4 min. In contrast, with the gate potential set at 1 V or lower, and specifically atVG= –2 V (Figure2c), this initial exponentially decreasing process does not restore the device’s source-drain to its initial value. Rather, a second much slower process occurs which does not restore the devices source drain current to near its initial values until two or more hours have passed. This slower process is dependent on the gate potential, being more rapid the higher the value ofVG. (e.g. the first panel of Figure2c (VG= –2 V) shows that 4 min. after the H2flow is shut off, the source-drain current is still two orders of magnitude above the device’s value prior to H2exposure.) However, the device does recover almost all most of its initial behavior after ∼4 h of exposure to flowing dry air.

Perfectly crystalline stannic oxide (SnO2) is an insulator with a direct bandgap of 3.6 eV. Films and nanowires of SnO2are, however, unintentional n-type semiconductors with rather high conductivities suggesting the presence of shallow donor states likely associated with one or more defects or impurity sites. The nature of the defects responsible for these donor states continues to be debated.25-31Samson and Fonstad proposed oxygen lattice vacancies in the bulk as the key contributor.28For high surface-to-volume systems such as nanowires, surface oxygen vacancies such as those studied and imaged by Schaub et al. on rutile TiO2[110],32have been suggested to be primarily responsible for the conductivity of n-type SnO2.33,34Interstitial tin has also been proposed;29as have H atoms residing in oxygen substitutional sites where they bridge three tin atoms (a so-called HOdefect).25Singh et al. discount the interstitial tin hypothesis questioning the reliability of formation energies returned by DFT-LDA calculations, and cite as further support for substitutional hydrogen being the progenitor of tin oxide’s conductivity the fact that the concentration of such a defect would be oxygen partial-pressure dependent, as observed.25(The DFT-GGA computations of Singh et al. also suggest that bulk oxygen vacancies alone could not be responsible for the unintentional n-character of tin oxide since the states associated with them would lie too far below the conduction band edge (ionization energy ∼1.8 eV).

In addition to the H atom residing in an oxygen vacancy, Singh et al. also show that interstitial hydrogen located in an octahedral site (Hi) would also have appropriately shallow donor states. But they discount the likelihood that this impurity contributes a great deal to the carrier density by noting that those species are highly mobile and hence would be eliminated upon prolonged exposure to an oxidizing atmosphere, and their concentration should not be sensitive to oxygen partial pressure.

While the computations of Singh et al. make a convincing case that lattice oxygen vacancies are unlikely to be the defects responsible for tin oxide’s high conductance, they do not dismiss the possibility that in nanowires, where surface processes dominate, surface oxygen vacancies are chiefly responsible for the observed conductance.

Carrier density values extracted from threshold voltages are reported in Table1and expressed both as numbers of carriers cm−3and as the number of carriers in a single nanowire. (The change in the carrier concentration is a more directly relevant parameter than the current when connecting the chemical processes occurring at the nanowire’s surface to the device’s transport properties, since the latter depends both on the carrier density and the mobility, both of which change as a function of H2, but the changes in mobility are more difficult to relate to H2exposure.) The number of carriers per nanowire assumed the average NW to be a cylinder 15 μm long and 60 nm in diameter yielding a volume of 4.24 × 107nm3and a surface area of 2.83 × 106nm2. Table1also lists the total number of carriers as electrons per nm2of surface (i.e. the number of carriers in a nanowires divided by the nanowire’s area). The latter is helpful when assessing the relative contribution of surface and bulk defects to the carrier density of the nanowire. It is also worth keeping in mind that the unit cell constants of the rutile structure of SnO2area= 4.73Å,c= 3.18Å, (a unit cell contains two SnO2units), which suggests that a unit mesh has an area ∼0.15 nm2, or that 1 nm2spans ∼7 unit cell surfaces.

The relatively modest effect that H atom exposure has on the carrier density atVG= +2 V likely indicates that the current measured under these conditions approximately represents the device’s saturation current density, which, in turn, reflects the Boltzmann population in the conduction band at the operating temperature arising from all of the accessible donor states. The very rapid and large increase in the source-drain current atVG= –2 V (Figure2c) suggests that most of the shallow donor states created in/on the tin oxide nanowire (which ultimately supply the conduction band) are surface states, since the energy barrier to H penetration into subsurface sites would not permit so large a current increase in so short a time at such a low temperature (373K).

It is also worth noting that the SnO2-NW has sufficient surface area to accommodate the defects necessary to produce the observed carrier density even for the highest H2exposures, assuming that one defect produces one conduction electron. The observed conductance of pristine SnO2corresponds to a surface oxygen vacancy density of 0.025 nm−2(Table1), which (recalling that there are approximately 14 SnO2units per nm of surface) corresponds to <2 defects per 1000 SnO2units at the surface. This surface oxygen vacancy density is consistent with what has been reported, for example, for TiO2(110).32

The only hesitation one has in suggesting that surface oxygen vacancies are responsible for the observed conductivity of pristine SnO2nanowires, is the report of Singh et al.25which claims that thebulkoxygen vacancy state lies too low below the conduction band threshold to populate the conduction band significantly at low temperatures. However, the analogous calculation for asurfaceoxygen vacancy has not been reported. In view of the fact that all of our current observations (as well as all previously reported observations;1,15,17) are consistent with the proposition that surface oxygen vacancies are the major contributors to the observed conductivity of pristine SnO2, we will favor this explanation.

The nanowire’s available surface area can also accommodate the density of new defects required to account for the >7-fold increase in carrier density measured for Pd-decorated nanowires under 2500 ppm flowing H2exposure. Table1indicates that a density of 0.16 defects nm−2would produce the observed source drain current. The fact that the nanowire’s dramatic sensitivity to H2is due to the catalytic processes enabled by the Pd nanoparticles, in whose absence the pristine nanowire is only very slightly H2sensitive, also tends to support the conclusion that in the absence of a source of H atoms (as opposed to H2), H-dependent defects do not normally play a major role in the conductance of SnO2nanowires.

The most likely process accounting for the system’s dramatic hydrogen response is the reaction of H atoms with surface oxygen to create hydroxyl groups. The surface oxygens are largely doubly charged anions; hence the OH−group created following the reaction of O2−with H would produce new donor states to accommodate the electron released in the reaction. In the presence of a great deal of H atoms these hydroxyls can further react with H to create water, which can desorb to leave behind an additional surface oxygen vacancy of the kind we proposed contribute to the conductivity of pristine SnO2nanowires, and creating the opportunity for yet another conduction electron. (These processes are illustrated inFigure3.)

A schematic showing probable three main processes occurring on the Pd nanoparticle decorated SnO2NW on exposure to H2. (1) Catalytic dissociation of diatomic hydrogen on palladium nanoparticles producing H atoms. (2) Reaction of H atoms with surface oxygen to create hydroxyl groups. (3) Reaction of the hydroxyls with surface oxygen to create water, leaving behind an additional surface oxygen vacancy further contributing to the conductivity of pristine SnO2nanowires.

The recovery of the nanowire’s conductivity when H2is shut off would correspond to two processes: the oxidation of surface OH−groups back to O2−, and/or the filling of surface oxygen vacancies by oxygen from the dry air stream. Both of these processes require electrons as reaction partners and would therefore be slow when the gate bias is set at -2V where the availability of electrons is reduced. Whereas atVG= +2 V the process could be rapid as observed. For oxygen reacting with OH−groups the rate would also be slowed by the need for two neighboring hydroxyl groups to contribute an H atom to the formation of the product (water).

One notes in passing that what we have reported here is the (reversible) reduction of tin oxide by H atoms produced in situ by the catalytic dissociation of H2on Pd nanoparticles for which the tin oxide is the support, to form water. An interesting aspect of this reaction is that its rate and extent are strongly directed by the gate potential of the device which modulates the concentration of electrons necessary in the reaction(s), thereby in essence modifying the positions of the chemical potential of the surface reactions with respect to the Fermi level of the tin oxide. Hence, this is an example of gate-potential-directed surface chemistry.

In summary, by using thin, atomic-layer-deposited aluminum oxide as the gate oxide, single-nanowire FET gas sensors were fabricated with unprecedented gate-voltage control. Devices with Pd-nanoparticle decorated tin-oxide nanowires serving as the channel show unusually high sensitivity to H2when operated in its charge depletion region. For example, with a gate bias of –3 V, 2500 ppm of H2induced an almost 10 000-fold change in the source-drain current, as compared to factors ∼60 at zero gate bias. The large current increments result from very great increases in charge carrier densities (>7 fold with exposure to 2500 ppm H2) ascribed to H-atom based defects created at the surface of the tin oxide. These we speculate (based on the observed highly-gate-bias sensitive hydrogen desorption kinetics) to be surface species such as OH−or additional surface oxygen vacancies resulting from the progressive reaction of OH−with H atoms.

Synthesis of SnO2Nanowires: Tin oxide nanowires were synthesized by chemical vapor deposition.15-17Briefly, an alumina boat with SnO powder (5g, 99.9%, Alfa Aesar) was placed at the center of 10cm long quartz tube without further purification. A pre-cleaned Si/SiO2substrates (1 cm × 1 cm, degenerately doped p-type (110) Si wafer with 100 nm thermal oxide) covered by vapor deposited gold film (2.0 nm) was first rapid thermally annealed at 900°C under N2atmosphere for 5 min. This resulted in the breakdown of gold film to form uniform 20 nm gold nanoparticles (Figure S3). The substrate was then immediately loaded in the quartz tube approximately 5mm downstream from the SnO powder. The whole set-up was then placed at the center of a quartz tube furnace and evacuated. Argon carrier gas (50 sccm) containing traces of oxygen were introduced into furnace and maintained in the range 150–170 Torr using a mechanical pump. The furnace temperature was increased to 900 °C at 50 °C/min ramp rate and sample growth proceeded for 60 min following which the samples were allowed to cool down to room temperature in flowing Ar and the nanowire-covered substrate was removed from the surface.

SnO2NWFET Fabrication: The as-synthesized nanowires were then transferred to a pre-cleaned p-type Si wafer (boron-doped, 0.02 Ω cm) covered with 50 nm thick ALD-grown Al2O3film, which served as the dielectric layer for back gated FET measurements. Nanowires were transferred to the Si wafer by gently pressing the nanowire-covered growth substrate onto the Al2O3/Si substrate. Metallic Ti/Au (50/250 nm) source-drain electrodes were then fabricated on the nanowires by conventional e-beam metal vapor deposition through a shadow mask. Isolated individual tin oxide nanowires were identified and used for further measurements. Following the fabrication of the single-nanowire FET, a 1 nm thick (mass thickness) Pd film was deposited on the device using e-beam evaporation at a base pressure of 1 × 10−6Torr. Samples were then annealed in a nitrogen atmosphere for 1 min at 300 °C. All current-voltage measurements were carried out on isolated individual nanowires in a custom-built chamber in which the temperature, pressure and gas compositions can be varied. Gas compositions in the 3–900 mTorr range were controlled by mass flow meters. Both conductometric and transistor measurements were performed under different gaseous environments at 100 °C using Keithley 2612A source meter (Keithley, Cleveland, OH).

Supporting Information is available from the Wiley Online Library or from the author.

This work was supported by the Institute for Collaborative Biotechnologies through grant DAAD19–03-D-0004 from the U.S. Army Research Office and made extensive use of the MRL Central Facilities at UCSB supported by the National Science Foundation under award nos. DMR-0080034 and DMR-0216466 for the HRTEM/STEM microscopy. The authors also acknowledge the Partnership for International Research and Education–for Electronic Chemistry and Catalysis at Interfaces–NSF grants number OISE-0530268. Helpful discussions with Dr. Martin Scheirhorn, Brian Thibeault, and Professor Jeongmin Baik are also greatly acknowledged. This article is part of the Special Issue on Materials Research at the University of California, Santa Barbara.

Detailed facts of importance to specialist readers are published as ”Supporting Information”. Such documents are peer-reviewed, but not copy-edited or typeset. They are made available as submitted by the authors.

Please note: The publisher is not responsible for the content or functionality of any supporting information supplied by the authors. Any queries (other than missing content) should be directed to the corresponding author for the article.

Volume23,Issue20

Special Issue: Materials Research at the University of California, Santa Barbara

May 24, 2011

Pages2306-2312

Copyright © 1999-2025John Wiley & Sons, Incor related companies. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence technologies or similar technologies.

Your password has been changed

Enter your email address below.

Please check your email for instructions on resetting your password.
                    If you do not receive an email within 10 minutes, your email address may not be registered,
                    and you may need to create a new Wiley Online Library account.

Can't sign in? Forgot your username?

Enter your email address below and we will send you your username

If the address matches an existing account you will receive an email with instructions to retrieve your username