Post-deposition heat treatment effect on pH sensing behavior of chemical bath deposited nanostructured zinc oxide
Author links open overlay panel
Aimi Bazilah Binti Rosli a
, 
Nur Hazirah Binti Hamid b
, 
Muhammad Alhadi Bin Zulkefle a
, 
Shafinaz Sobihana Binti Shariffudin b
, 
Wan Fazlida Hanim Binti Abdullah a
, 
Sukreen Hana Herman a c

Show more

Add to Mendeley

Share

Cite
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhydene.2022.10.036
Get rights and content
Highlights
•
ZnO nanostructures deposited by the facile CBD method was proposed as an EGFET pH sensor.
•
Effect of post-deposition heat treatment temperature on the ZnO nanostructures EGFET pH sensor performance was studied.
•
300 °C post-deposition heat treatment sample showed the highest sensitivity of 52.9 mV/pH with a linearity value of 0.9947
Abstract
The post-deposition heat treatment process was studied to improve zinc oxide (ZnO) ‘s pH sensing performance as the sensing electrode (SE) of extended-gate field effect transistor (EGFET) pH sensor. The low-temperature chemical bath deposited ZnO nanostructured thin film was heated from 200 to 400 °C before being applied as the SE. The heat treatment enhanced the agglomeration of ZnO nanoparticles, and the formation of nanonails was seen at the highest temperature of 400 °C. It was proven by XRD results that the crystallinity of ZnO samples were improved when the ZnO SE was heated at 300 °C and formed different growth orientations at (100), (002) and (101) before turning to (101) growth orientation at 400 °C heat treatment. The heat treatment process also increased the ZnO particle size from 15.47 nm to 260 nm at 300 °C. Further increasing the heat treatment up to 400 °C decreased the particle size to 44.30 nm. The ZnO morphology was correlated with the pH sensor performance. The clustered structure of the untreated ZnO sample exhibited a good pH sensitivity of 52.4 mV/pH with a linearity of 0.93 and a hysteresis value of 46.71 mV. On the other hand, almost similar pH sensitivity was obtained from the sample treated at 300 °C having poly-structure morphology, which was 52.9 mV/pH, but with a significantly improved linearity of 0.99, and hysteresis values of 41.99 mV respectively. The 300 °C heat treatment also improved the stability of ZnO SE performance. The difference in the performance of these two samples can also be related to the crystalline quality of the film.
Previous article in issue

Next article in issue
Keywords
CBDEGFETpH sensorPost-deposition heat treatmentZnO nanostructures
Introduction
Nanomaterials play a crucial role in various fields due to their outstanding physical and chemical properties. Having unique properties such as good conductivity, high surface area-to-volume ratio, high mechanical strength and excellent electrocatalytic activity make nanomaterials better than bulk materials for sensor developments [[1], [2], [3]]. In addition, to improve the electrocatalytic characteristics, nanomaterials like metal and metal oxide nanoparticles were used to improve the sensitivity of the electrochemical sensors [[4], [5], [6]]. Metal nanoparticles (MNPs) are high in demand for the development of electrochemical sensor applications since it can assist the high electron transfer through their small size and large surface area-to-volume ratio that speed up the electron transfer process [7]. However, MNPs are costly and agglomeration of MNPs that results in less reproducible sensor performance [8,9] are some of their disadvantages. Considering the above problems, metal oxide nanomaterials have emerged to replace MNPs due to their advantages such as high stability, low cost and versatility in chemical properties. Numerous researches have focused on zinc oxide (ZnO) nanostructures material due to its excellent electrical and optical properties [[10], [11], [12]]. Besides that, ZnO also exhibits a wide range of nanostructure morphologies depending on the growing methods and conditions. It is well established that ZnO nanostructured materials have a high surface area-to-volume ratio, more significant surface adsorption, high electron mobility and chemical stability [[13], [14], [15]]. These advantages make ZnO suitable for various applications including photocatalysis, optoelectronic devices and electrochemical sensors [[16], [17], [18], [19], [20], [21]].
ZnO's properties are strongly influenced by its surface chemistry, size, and shape. Therefore, it is critical to develop some synthesis methods that can control the required properties of ZnO nanostructures. ZnO nanostructures as EGFET sensing electrodes can be deposited using numerous methods such as ion beam sputtering, chemical vapor deposition, atomic layer deposition and chemical bath deposition (CBD) [[22], [23], [24]]. Most of these methods require high vacuum and temperatures as well as a complicated setup [25,26], which may increase the fabrication cost. The wet deposition process such as CBD receives excellent attention due to its significant advantages such as low cost, simple methods and ability to provide large-scale processing for semiconductor devices [27,28]. Besides the growth methods, the ZnO nanostructures' surface morphologies also depend on growth and post-deposition treatment conditions. The heat treatment is generally known to restructure the surface morphologies and enhance the material properties for better device performance [29,30].
The determination of pH value becomes an important measurement in a wide range of environmental, medical, and industrial areas. Various kinds of methods were used to detect the pH value. The conventional glass electrodes offer several advantages such as good selectivity, high sensitivity and long lifetime [31]. Nevertheless, the limitation occurs in terms of high-temperature stability, mechanical fragility and high impedance caused by continuous optimization of pH sensors’ designs [[32], [33], [34]]. In the last few decades, the development of pH sensors based on the field-effect transistor (FET) was done extensively. One of the FET-based sensors that received considerable attention is the extended-gate field effect transistor (EGFET) pH sensor. This EGFET-based pH sensor offers several advantages: low cost, simple packaging, and insensitive to light and temperature [[35], [36], [37]]. By extending a chemically sensitive thin film at the end of the FET gate electrode, the EGFET configuration has separated the FET component from the chemical environment, forming the extended sensing electrode [38].
The EGFET that uses ZnO nanostructures as the sensing electrode has attracted considerable attention. The large surface-to-volume ratio of ZnO nanostructures leads to a short diffusion distance between the sensing electrode surface and electrolyte that enhances the performance of the EGFET pH sensor [39]. Even though the amphoteric properties of ZnO material made it easier to dissolve in both acidic and basic solutions, this ZnO material still can be used as a disposable sensing electrode since the sensing electrode is extended from the primary device for EGFET measurement setup. There are several reports on the use of ZnO nanostructures as pH sensors, as summarized in Table 1:
Table 1. pH sensitivity of ZnO-based sensing electrodes.

Sensing electrodes	Sensitivity (mV/pH)	Ref
Coaxial-structured ZnO/silicon nanowire	46.25	[40]
Intrinsic ZnO thin film	37.14	[40]
Tantalum doped zinc oxide (ZnO:Ta)	41.56	[41]
Indium gallium zinc oxide (IGZO)	50.0	[42]
Hung-Hsien Li et al. used coaxial-structured ZnO/silicon nanowires as an EGFET-based pH sensor [40]. The pH sensitivity obtained was 46.25 mV/pH in the pH range of 1–13. They also tested the intrinsic ZnO thin film as a pH sensor. They found that the sensitivity of intrinsic ZnO was 37.14 mV/pH which is lower than that of coaxial-structured ZnO/silicon nanowires. Ying-Shuo Chiu et al. studied the tantalum-doped zinc oxide (ZnO: Ta) thin film as the sensing electrode for the EGFET pH sensor. They used a vapor cooling condensation system to fabricate the ZnO: Ta thin film. The pH sensitivity obtained from their research was 41.56 mV/pH [41]. The study of ZnO as an EGFET pH sensor also was done by Jun-Cheng Lin using indium gallium zinc oxide (IGZO) as a sensing electrode [42]. The optimum pH sensitivity obtained from their work was 50 mV/pH in the pH range of 2–10. Based on literature reviews, most of the researchers reported that doped or extrinsic materials improved the pH sensitivity performance of the ZnO material [41,43,44].
Herein, we report a facile deposition process of undoped ZnO nanostructures using the CBD method and their application as the sensing electrode of an EGFET pH sensor. The deposited samples were exposed to a heat treatment at different temperatures ranging from 200 to 400 °C and the effect of the heat treatment temperature on the EGFET pH sensor performance is presented.
Materials and methods
Materials
Zinc nitrate hexahydrate (Zn(NO₃)₂.6H₂O) and hexamethylenetetramine (HMT: C6H12N4)pH from Sigma Aldrich brand with reagent grade of 98% and 99% respectively were used for ZnO solution preparation. The commercialized J.T. Beaker buffer solution ranging from 4 to 10 and Friendemann Schmidt Chemical buffer solutions 2 and 12 were used for pH sensing measurement.
Deposition process of ZnO nanostructures
This research used the chemical bath deposition (CBD) in a water bath to deposit the ZnO nanostructures. Prior to the deposition process, the ZnO solution was prepared. Zinc nitrate hexahydrate (Zn(NO₃)₂.6H₂O) was used as the precursor while hexamethylenetetramine (HMT: C6H12N4) was used as the stabilizer. The solution was prepared by mixing 15 g (Zn(NO₃)₂.6H₂O) and 7.0 g C6H12N4 in 500 ml of deionized (DI) water. The mixture solution was then sonicated at 50 °C for 30 min in an ultrasonic bath. Lastly, the prepared solution was aged and stirred for 3 h at 300 rpm under room temperature. The indium tin oxide (ITO) coated glass substrate with a 1 × 1 cm2 opening area was immersed in Schott bottles with the ITO surface facing upward. Subsequently, the beaker was placed in a water bath at 95 °C for 3 h. The samples were allowed to cool overnight in a water bath before rinsing with DI water and blow-drying with nitrogen gas. The deposited samples were then subjected to post-deposition heat treatment at different temperatures ranging from 200 to 400 °C. For comparison, an as-deposited sample was also prepared.
Characterization technique
For physical properties, field emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM, JEOL JSM-7600F) was used to observe the surface morphologies of the deposited sample. The crystalline properties and surface topology of the deposited samples were examined using X-ray diffraction (PANalytical X'Pert PRO XRD) with monochromatic Cu Ka radiation (λ = 0.154 nm) and atomic force microscopy (AFM, XE-100 Park Systems), respectively. The pH sensor sensitivity and linearity of the samples were observed using the semiconductor device parameter analyzer model Keysight B15000A using EGFET setup as shown in Fig. 1 while its hysteresis and drift properties were examined using Keysight U2356A 64CH multifunction DAQ. The ZnO sensing electrode configuration used in this research is shown in the inset of Fig. 1 below.
Fig. 1
Download: Download high-res image (318KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 1. EGFET measurement setup. Inset shows a schematic side view of ZnO sensing electrode.

Results & discussions
Physical properties of nanostructured ZnO sensing electrode
Fig. 2 a) shows the surface morphologies of the as-deposited sample while Fig. 2 b), c) and d) show the surface morphologies of the treated ZnO nanostructures at different heating temperatures. From the FESEM image in Fig. 2 (a), the as-deposited sample exhibits the morphology of clustered ZnO nanoparticles with an average diameter of 289 nm. When the sample was subjected to the heating process, at 200 °C, agglomeration of the nanoparticles occurred, as can be seen in Fig. 2(b) with an average size of the agglomerated particles of 1405 nm. The agglomeration and clustering of the ZnO grains into larger crystals at 200 °C are due to the elimination of solvent when heat treatment was applied [45,46]. Increasing the annealing temperature to 300 °C caused the clustered ZnO nanoparticles to become poly-structure, including nail-like and clustered ZnO particles (Fig. 2(c)). The structure changes from agglomerate ZnO to poly-structure resulting in the average diameter to decrease to 1063 nm. The density of the ZnO nano-nails increased as the annealing temperature increased to 400 °C, as evident in Fig. 2(d). The variation of the morphologies can be related to the thermal energy induced by the annealing process received by the nanoparticles. Higher temperature provides more energy for the nanoparticles to agglomerate and further grow into a larger quantity of nano-nails that reduce the average particle diameter to 461 nm.
Fig. 2
Download: Download high-res image (989KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 2. FESEM images of ZnO nanostructures heated at b) 200, c) 300 and d) 400 °C. a) shows the surface morphology of the as-deposited sample.

Fig. 3 (a) shows the surface topology for the as-deposited ZnO sample, while (b), (c) and (d) show the surface topology of deposited samples heated at different temperatures. From the results, the as-deposited sample exhibits the lowest average roughness (Ra) with a value of 3.245 nm. The roughness increased from 15.47 nm to 260 nm as the heating temperature increased to 200 and 300 °C. The increase in surface roughness with the increasing temperature was reported due to an increase in grain size [47]. At 300 °C, the ZnO atoms have enough activation or diffusion energy to occupy the correct site in the crystal lattice. The lower surface energy at 300 °C leads to an increase in ZnO grain size, contributing to high surface roughness [48]. However, the increment of the heating temperature to 400 °C has decreased the average roughness from 260 to 44.301 nm. This is probably due to the decrease in the grain boundaries [48] to form a more structured grain with enough energy from the higher temperature. The reduction in grain boundaries can be supported by the phase change from ZnO poly structures (Fig. 2 (c)) to ZnO nano nails (Fig. 2 (d)).
Fig. 3
Download: Download high-res image (769KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 3. AFM images for a) as-deposited ZnO nanostructures and ZnO nanostructures heated at b) 200, c) 300 and d) 400 °C.

The crystalline quality of the deposited ZnO nanostructures as well as ZnO samples heated at different temperatures, is shown in Fig. 4 (a), (b), (c) and (d), respectively. From Fig. 4 (a) and (b), it can be seen that the as-deposited and 200 °C samples show lower intensities of (100) ZnO growth orientation at 2 θ = 32.41. Only a 300 °C sample shows a polycrystalline structure with diffraction angles 2 θ = 32.41, 34.76 and 36.81 that correspond to (100), (002) and (101) growth orientations, indicating the improvement of crystalline quality at 300 °C. The XRD result of the 300 °C sample correlates with the FESEM image in Fig. 2 (c) as both results exhibit ZnO poly structure criteria. Increasing the heating temperature up to 400 °C showed the transformation of polycrystalline ZnO to a single-orientation polycrystalline structure at (100) orientation.
Fig. 4
Download: Download high-res image (454KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 4. XRD pattern for (a) as-deposited sample and those heated at (b) 200, (c) 300 and (d) 400 °C.

EGFET sensor characterizations
Sensitivity and linearity
The sensor's sensitivity for deposited samples was tested in a pH buffer solution of pH 2, 4, 7, 10 and 12 using an EGFET pH sensor setup. The current-voltage (I–V) curve was obtained using a semiconductor device analyzer. The I–V curves for each sample show no significant difference, in which, as shown in Fig. 5, the transfer curves of all samples exhibit right shifts as the pH increases. The sensitivity and linearity values for each sample are shown in the inset. The Vref -pH level graph was used to determine the sensitivity and linearity of samples. To plot this graph, the Vref value for each pH buffer solution was measured at 100 μA of the drain current (ID).
Fig. 5
Download: Download high-res image (927KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 5. EGFET transfer characteristics of ZnO nanostructures SE for different post-deposition heat treatment temperatures. a) shows the as-deposited sample, while b) – d) show the result of 200, 300 and 400 °C sample, respectively.

The slope and linear regressions of the Vref - pH graph were used to calculate the sensitivity and linearity of each sample. The sensitivity value for as-deposited sample, 200, 300 and 400 °C samples are 52.4, 44.0, 52.9 and 41.3 mV/pH, respectively, while the linearity of respective samples are 0.9360, 0.9861, 0.9947 and 0.9808, as tabulated in Table 2. The bare ITO was also tested in the same pH values to prove that the sensitivities obtained are from ZnO material. The sensitivity and linearity of bare ITO obtained are 20.5 mV and 0.836, respectively. This result shows the lowest sensitivity value, thus proving the high sensitivity values are obtained from ZnO material. Comparing the sensitivity of the as-deposited sample and that of the 200 °C sample, the sensitivity reduction of the latter is probably due to the agglomeration of particles that leads to a smaller surface-area-to-volume ratio.
Table 2. Sensitivity and linearity values of deposited samples at the different post-deposition heat temperatures.

Sample (°C)	Sensitivity (mV/pH)	Linearity
As-deposited	52.4	0.9360
200	44.0	0.9861
300	52.9	0.9947
400	41.3	0.9808
Further heating the ZnO SE lead to the formation of nano-nails and porous nanoparticles combined at 300 °C, increasing the surface area-to-volume ratio. However, at 400 °C, when nano-nails are the main morphology, the sensitivity decreased, along with the linearity. These show that surface-area-to-volume ratio is significant in determining the sensor sensitivity. A higher surface-area-to-volume ratio provides more dangling bonds and facilitates more reaction sites resulting in higher sensitivity. Increasing the annealing temperature may enhance the surface morphology to further increase the surface area-to-volume ratio with the formation of nanostructures, however at the same time, annealing is also known to improve the crystalline quality of the thin film, which also means the reduction of dangling bonds to react with the hydrogen ions, reducing the sensitivity. This explained the improvement of sensor sensitivity when the annealing temperature was increased to 300 °C and its reduction to 400 °C. Due to the dependency of the pH sensor on surface reaction, the surface site density is an acknowledged parameter that affects pH sensitivity. Therefore, nanocrystalline structures and a high number of available sites play significant roles in enhancing the ZnO membrane ionic conductivity, which is crucial for the pH-sensing process.
The sensing mechanism of ZnO nanostructures can be described by the site binding model (site dissociation) with double-layer theory. ZnO is a metal oxide that possesses amphoteric surface sites. As a result of the interaction between the ZnO surface and electrolytes, these amphoteric surface sites are prone to the dissociation process. When the ZnO sensing electrode was in contact with electrolyte solutions, the hydroxyl (OH) group that occurs at the surface of ZnO will act as discrete sites for the surface chemical reaction. The adsorption or de-adsorption of H+ ions to form positive and negative ions signifies the starting process of the surface charging mechanism. In an acidic solution, the protonation process occurs where protons (H+) in the liquid react with the OH groups on the ZnO surface, resulting in a surface with a positive charge. While in an alkaline solution, the OH group will deprotonate, leaving a negative charge surface [49,50]. This chemical reaction in both alkaline and acidic solutions are described in the following equations (1), (2)
(1)
(2)
The sensing mechanism explained above shows that OH groups play an essential role in helping ZnO to sense pH. More OH groups mean more interaction sites between ZnO and H ions in the solution. This can be seen in Equation (3), where the increase in the number of OH groups (Ns) would increase its sensitivity 
 due to improvement of the ion-exchange process [45]:
(3)
where q represents electron charges, Ns refers to the number of OH groups, Ka and Kb represent acidic and basic constants, k denotes the Boltzmann constant, T refers to absolute temperature. CDL signifies the capacitance of the electrical double layer.
In addition, the pH sensitivity of the membrane was reported to have a strong correlation with the charge of surface potential (Ψ) between the sensing membrane and electrolyte interface. According to site binding theory, the surface potential between the sensing membrane and electrolyte interface can be altered by the number of available binding sites on the sensing membrane. The surface potential can be calculated by Ref. [51]:
(4)
where pHPZC refers to the pH value at the point of zero charges. The pH sensitivity (β) relates directly to the number of available sites (Ns) and Ψ is a linear response to the pH, as can be seen from equations (3), (4).
The sensor linearity is also the highest for the sample of 300 °C, with the value of 0.9947, approaching 1. While the sensitivity of the as-deposited sample and that of 300 °C is somehow near due to the porous structure of both samples, the linearity of the 300 °C is superior. Besides the roughness and surface area to volume ratio, the porosity also improved sensing performance by increasing the charge accumulation sites. The increase in charge accumulation caused the current to rise and lead to better sensing performance [52]. The linearity of the 300 °C sample is significantly better than that of the untreated sample, probably due to better crystalline quality due to the heating process as can be observed from the XRD patterns in Fig. 4 (a) and (c), respectively. Linearity is an essential factor for a sensor especially for EGFET to realize electronic adaption of the sensor device to a more complicated system.
From equation (3), it is evident that the number of available sites influences the sensor sensitivity, and as mentioned above, the changes in the surface morphology and crystalline quality of the ZnO sensing layer are among the crucial factors that influence the number of available sites. The higher surface-area-to-volume ratio facilitates more general sites for ionic adsorption and reaction, thus improving sensor sensitivity. Relating the FESEM results in Fig. 2 and AFM results in Fig. 3 with the sensor performance in Fig. 5 and Table 2, we found that the sample with the higher roughness has higher sensor sensitivity. On the other hand, at some point, some dangling bonds defect of the poorly crystallized materials may contribute to more ionic reaction sites but may lead to poor stability. This can explain the characteristics in this work where the as-deposited sample with the lowest crystallinity as shown in the XRD results of Fig. 4 has almost a comparable sensor sensitivity with the one heated at 300 °C, but with lower linearity as in Table 2. The low sensitivity of the sample heated at 400 °C may be associated with the reduction of dangling bonds with the increase in the post-deposition heat treatment temperature. From the XRD results, the full width at half maximum of (100) peak for the sample treated at 300 °C and 400 °C is 0.657 and 0.295, respectively showing that the crystalline quality of the 400 °C is better, thus leading to a lower number of dangling bonds and therefore, lower sensor sensitivity.
Ying-Shuo Chiu et al. also has investigated the intrinsic ZnO material as EGFET pH sensor using vapor cooling condensation method together with anodic alumina membrane (AAM) template. In order to study the effect of ZnO morphology on sensing performance, the authors have passivated the ZnO surface with the photoelectrochemical (PEC) system. 4 types of ZnO (passivated ZnO thin films, un-passivated ZnO thin film, passivated ZnO nanorods and un-passivated ZnO nanorods) were compared. From their research, they found that the nanorod structures improved the sensitivity of sensor performance from 38.46 mV/pH to 44.01 mV/pH. Besides that, they also found that the passivated ZnO nanorods has optimum sensing performance with sensitivity of 49.35 mV/pH [53].
Moreover, Pham Van Thanh et al. also has fabricated the ZnO nanorods using galvanic cell-based hydrothermal process. In this research, the Aluminum (Al) foil was used as substrate. In order to study the effect of ZnO nanorods sizes on EGFET pH sensor behavior, the deposition times was varied for 1, 3 and 7 h. The as deposited sample without Al foil substrate also was used as comparison. From their research, they found that only the ZnO nanorods fabricated on Al foil for 7 h showed the linearity response towards H+ ions while other samples could not operate as EGFET pH sensor sensing electrode due to low density of ZnO nanorods. The optimum sensitivity of ZnO sample as EGFET pH sensor found in this research was about 15.4 mV/pH [54].
ZnO nanorods as EGFET pH sensor sensing electrode was studied by Sheng-Joue Young et al. The authors compared the intrinsic ZnO nanorod with the ZnO nanorods mix with Au particles. From their study they found that their intrinsic ZnO nanorods samples gave only 24.67 mV/pH. The presence of extrinsic element improved their sensing performance to 76.75 mV/pH [55].
Besides ZnO as the SE for EGFET pH sensor, Prashant Sharma et al. has investigated the sensing electrode performance using Na3BiO4–Bi2O3mix oxide nanostructures. In their study, they found that the Na3BiO4–Bi2O3 mix oxide nanostructures can be used as sensing electrode for detection H+ ions. The sensitivity and linearity of Na3BiO4–Bi2O3 were 49.63 mV/pH and 0.98 respectively [56].
The influence of heat treatment on the SE performance was also investigated by Tung-Ming Pan et al. using TaOx/Ta stacked material. In their research, the heat treatment was varied from 300 to 700 °C. They found that, 500 °C heat treatment improved the sensitivity of TaOx/Ta SE with Super-Nernstian value of 61.28 mV/pH [57].
Fayroz A. Sabah et al. also has investigated the influence of heat treatment on EGFET pH sensor sensing performance. They used copper sulphide (CuS) as a sensing material. In their study, the heat temperature was fixed at 150 °C while the duration of heat treatment was varied for 5,15 and 30 min. They found that, the EGFET sensing performance of CuS is optimum at 30 min heat treatment with sensitivity of 27.8 mV/pH and a linearity of 0.957 [45].
From the previous research on EGFET pH sensors mentioned above, it is evident that the ZnO nanostructures not only can be used as sensing electrode for H+ ions detection, but also have a comparable sensitivity with other metal oxide materials. Furthermore, as can be seen from Table 3 below, based on the results from this work, it is also proven that the sensing performance of intrinsic ZnO SE as EGFET pH sensor can be improved using heat treatment process. Table 3 below summarized the comparison of this work with previous work on ZnO SE as pH sensor.
Table 3. Comparison of this work with previous work on ZnO SE as pH sensor.

Type of Material	Method	Varied Parameter	Sensitivity (mV/pH)	Linearity	Ref
UnPassivated-ZnO Thin Film	vapor cooling condensation	ZnO Morphology (Thin Fim and nanorods with passivated/unpassivated surface)	38.46	–	[53]
UnPassivated-ZnO Nanarods	vapor cooling condensation	ZnO Morphology
Thin Fim and nanorods with passivated/unpassivated surface)	44.01	–	[53]
Passivated-ZnO Thin Film	vapor cooling condensation	ZnO Morphology
Thin Fim and nanorods with passivated/unpassivated surface)	42.37	–	[53]
Passivated-ZnO Nanarods	vapor cooling condensation	ZnO Morphology
Thin Fim and nanorods with passivated/unpassivated surface)	49.35	–	[53]
ZnO nanorods (Optimum at 7 h deposition time)	galvanic cell-based hydrothermal process.	Deposition Times was varied (1, 3 and 7 h)	15.40	–	[54]
Intrinsic ZnO nanorods	hydrothermal method and DC magnetron
sputtering	As deposited	24.67	0.986	[55]
ZnO nanorods	hydrothermal method and DC magnetron
sputtering	Doping (Au-adsorbed)	76.75	0.990	[55]
copper sulphide (CuS)	spray pyrolysis	Heat duration (5, 15 and 30 min)	27.80	0.957	[45]
ZnO nanostructure	CBD	heat treatment (RT, 200, 300 and 400 °C)	52.90	0.9947	[this work]
Hysteresis and drift measurement
For the hysteresis characterization, the output voltage of the deposited ZnO sensing electrodes at different post-annealing temperatures was measured using buffer solutions starting from pH loops of 7 → 4 → 7 → 10 → 7 for 500 s interval time for each pH buffer value. This measurement was done to observe the intrinsic defects of the deposited samples by measuring the delay of the pH sensor. A good electrochemical sensor will have a lower hysteresis value. The sensor's accuracy will be limited due to the high hysteresis value [58]. The plots derived from the hysteresis measurement are shown in Fig. 6. The value determined for the as-deposited sample and samples annealed at 200, 300 and 400 °C is 46.71, 49.46, 41.99 and 73.36 mV, respectively. It is noticeable that the sample heated at 300 °C has the lowest hysteresis value of 41.99 mV with a response time of 79, 136 and 94 s in acidic, neutral and basic solutions, respectively. Based on hysteresis results from Fig. 6 (a) and (b), it can be seen that the stability of as-deposited and 200 °C samples in acidic solutions are poor. It is evident that both samples' response was lost after immersion in pH 4. The heat treatment at 300 and 400 °C improved the ZnO surface structure and enhanced the stability of samples in acidic solution as shown in Fig. 6 (c) and (d), respectively. The lowest hysteresis value of 300 °C indicates good agreement with the sensitivity result that shows the sensitivity of 300 °C is highest compared to other samples. The surface site model also can be applied to discuss the hysteresis performance. It can be assumed that a fraction of the sites responds slowly to the pH changes due to the crystalline imperfection of the sensing material resulting from crystalline defects. The defects and vacancies in the sensing layer may lead to ions' adsorption to the surface, thus delaying the reference voltage response.
Fig. 6
Download: Download high-res image (817KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 6. Hysteresis characteristic of ZnO nanostructures for a) as-deposited sample and samples heated at b) 200 c) 300 and d) 400 °C.

Further increasing the annealing temperature to 300 °C improved the crystalline quality as seen from the XRD results, thus minimizing the number of attached ions on the surface, leading to a lower hysteresis value. Therefore, the low value of hysteresis can be referred to as the low defect density of ZnO nanostructure on a 300 °C sample surface, leading to minimum delay in pH sensing and contributing to the high sensitivity of the pH sensor. However, the poor hysteresis for the 400 °C sample is probably due to the higher surface potential of the ZnO nanoparticles, which somehow may disrupt the stability of the site dissociation mechanism, as mentioned above. Poor stability behavior also can be seen in the drift characteristics for the 400 °C sample.
The stability or drift performance is one indicator of the excellent sensing performance of the pH sensor. This measurement was conducted using the same setup as the hysteresis measurement. The sample was immersed in pH buffers 4, 7 and 10 for this stability test. The measurement was conducted for 500 s for each buffer solution. Fig. 7 a) – d) shows the stability performance for the as-deposited, 200, 300 and 400 °C ZnO samples, respectively. The results show that the sensing performance of the as-deposited ZnO sensing electrode was improved when the post-deposition heat treatment was applied up to 300 °C before degrading at 400 °C. This result is significant with physical properties observed from AFM and XRD in Fig. 3, Fig. 4. The 300 °C samples show better physical properties than others, contributing to better EGFET pH performance.
Fig. 7
Download: Download high-res image (586KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 7. Drift characteristic of ZnO nanostructures for a) as-deposited sample and samples heated at b) 200 c) 300 and d) 400 °C in pH buffer 4, 7 and 10.

Conclusion
Nanostructured ZnO was successfully grown on ITO substrates using the simple CBD method. The post-deposition heat treatment dependence of the pH sensing performance was investigated by applying the deposited thin film as the sensing electrode of an EGFET pH sensor. The as-deposited sample was a porous nanoparticles thin film and the post-deposition heat treatment-induced agglomeration of particles and formation of nano-nails. The crystallinity of the ZnO thin film was improved when heat treatment was applied up to 300 °C and formed ZnO poly structure at (100), (002) and (101) growth orientations. Further increased heat treatment to 400 °C caused the poly-structured ZnO thin film turned to nanonails with a single growth orientation at (101). The thickness of the ZnO SE also increased from 15.47 nm to 260 nm when 300 °C of heat treatment was applied before decreasing to 44.30 nm at 400 °C heat treatment. The performance of the pH sensor showed some correlation with the morphology and the crystalline quality of the thin film. The highest sensitivity and linearity recorded in this work were 52.9 mV/pH and 0.9947, respectively, for the sample heated at 300 °C. The sample heated at 300 °C also showed the optimum hysteresis value (41.99 mV) and better stability of sensor performance. Porous nanoparticles' structure enhanced the sensor's performance due to the high surface-area-to-volume ratio that facilitates more reaction sites, thus increasing the sensor sensitivity. The results showed that increasing the heat treatment temperature may induce surface-area-to-volume ratio thus enhance the sensor performance and stability; however, further increasing the annealing temperature may result in the reduction of dangling bonds due to the improvement of crystalline quality and thus, in turn, reduced the reaction sites along with the sensor sensitivity.
