Si-Fen Yang

Beijing National Laboratory for Molecular Sciences, CAS Key Laboratories of Organic Solids and Colloid, Interface and Chemical Thermodynamics, Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100190 P. R. China

University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100049 P. R. China

Xiao Zhang

Peng-Lei Chen

Corresponding Author

Zi-Tong Liu

Jian-Wu Tian

Guan-Xin Zhang

De-Qing Zhang

Give access

Share full-text access

Use the link below to share a full-text version of this article with your friends and colleagues.Learn more.

Share a link

Functional field-effect transistors (FETs) have received increasing attention in recent years. Herein, it is demonstrated that the incorporation of hydrophilic tetraethylene glycol (TEEG) chains into the diketopyrrolopyrrole (DPP)-based semiconducting polymer (PDPP3T1) can facilitate the formation of polymeric monolayer at the air–water interface, and the resulting field-effect transistors (FETs) show sensitive and selective response toward alcohol vapor. By using the Langmuir–Schaefer method, monolayer and ultrathin films from bilayer to five-layer can be successfully prepared. Interestingly, nanopores with sizes of 50–100 nm are formed within the monolayer film, as observed by using atomic force microscopy. The monolayer FET exhibits relatively high hole mobilities up to 0.014 cm2V−1s−1, which is among the highest charge mobilities reported for ultrathin film FETs prepared with the Langmuir technique. Moreover, hole mobility increases with an increase in the thickness of the ultrathin film from monolayer to three-layer, and it reaches 0.04 cm2V−1s−1for three-layer FETs. A variation of both on-current and off-current is detected for monolayer FET upon exposure to alcohol vapor. The monolayer FET displays ultrahigh sensitivity (down to 1 ppb) and good selectivity toward alcohol vapors, in particular ethanol vapor. This can be attributed to the synergetic effects of the hydrophilic TEEG chains in PDPP3T1 and the nanopores within the monolayers.

Field-effect transistors (FETs) with conjugated polymers have been intensively investigated owing to promising applications in low-cost, flexible, and large-area electronics.1-9These studies also suggest that the first few layers of organic/polymeric semiconductors play key roles in determining the performances of FETs.10-15Moreover, downscaling the film thickness to a single molecular layer is of technological interest for the realization of bottom-up electronic devices.16-18In particular, monolayer organic FETs (OFETs) are beneficial for sensing applications as the binding of the respective analytes with the semiconducting monolayer is expected to affect the charge transporting.19-23Consequently, such sensors with monolayer FETs can show high sensitivity and fast response.

Various approaches have been explored to fabricate FETs with ultrathin semiconducting films. These include unconventional spin-coating and formation of self-assembly monolayer on surface.24-28Langmuir deposition method is known to enable the realization of monolayers at the air/liquid interface with precision control over the molecule lateral packing density. In fact, Langmuir technique was successfully utilized to transfer monolayer thin films of organic and polymeric semiconductors onto the substrates to fabricate FETs.29-35For instance, Yli-Lahti and co-workers first reported FETs with Langmuir–Blodgett (LB) films of poly(3-hexylthicphene)/arachidic acid, but the resulting FETs exhibited rather low charge mobilities.34This is probably due to the fact that the LB films contain arachidic acid which is required for the formation of the polymer LB films at air–water interface. Facchetti and Pignataro and co-workers prepared n-type monolayer FET with naphthalene diimide based polymer (P(NDI2OD-T2)) by using Langmuir–Schaefer method.35These conjugated polymers are basically hydrophobic, but it is known that amphiphilic molecules with both hydrophobic and hydrophilic moieties can form more ordered monolayers at the air–water interface.36-38Leclerc and co-workers studied the formation of LB monolayers at air–water interface and the transfer of the monolayers onto the substrate for the conjugated polymer with both alkyl and oligo(ethylene glycol) side chains, but the semiconducting properties of the monolayers were not addressed.38

In this paper, we report the monolayer FET with diketopyrrolopyrrole (DPP)-terthiophene conjugated polymer (PDPP3T1,Scheme1). The monolayer of PDPP3T1 was prepared and transferred onto the substrate with the Langmuir–Schaefer method. The selection of PDPP3T1 is based on the fact that DPP-based D-A polymers show high charge mobilities.39,40Each DPP unit in PDPP3T1 is connected to both branching alkyl and tetraethylene glycol (TEEG) chains which are expected to endow PDPP3T1 with amphiphilic nature that is beneficial for monolayer formation at the air–water interface according to previous report.38We show that a monolayer of PDPP3T1 can be formed at the air–water interface. Moreover, a monolayer and multilayers (up to five layers) of PDPP3T1 can be deposited onto the substrate with the Langmuir–Schaefer method. The monolayer FET shows typical p-type semiconducting characteristics with hole mobility up to 0.014 cm2V−1s−1. Notably, the monolayer FET shows highly sensitive and selective response toward ethanol vapor with detection limit as low as 1 ppb.

As outlined in Scheme S1 (Supporting Information), the preparation of PDPP3T1 started from compound 1 which was reacted with 11-(3-iodopropyl)henicosane and triethylene glycol-2-bromoethyl methyl ether to yield 2-(4-decyltetradecyl)-3,6-di(thiophen-2-yl)-5-(2,5,8,11-tetraoxatridecan-13-yl)-2,5-dihydropyrrolo[3,4-c]pyrrole-1,4-dione. Further bromination withN-bromosuccinimide led to 2 in a total yield of 9.1%. The Stille cross-coupling of 2 with 2,5-bis(trimethylstannyl)thiophene led to PDPP3T1.The resulting polymer was precipitated out from the reaction mixtures after addition of methanol, followed by Soxhlet extraction with methanol, hexane, acetone to remove the respective monomers and oligomers, yielding PDPP3T1 in 96.0% yield. PDPP3T1 can be dissolved in CHCl3, 1,1,2,2-tetrachloroethane, and other aromatic solvents. The molecular weight of PDPP3T1 was determined with gel permeation chromatography (GPC) at 150 °C using polystyrenes as standard with 1, 2, 4-trichlorobenzene as eluent. The weight-averaged molecular weight of PDPP3T1 was measured to be 28.3 kg mol−1with a polydispersity of 2.24. Based on the thermal gravity analysis (TGA) curve shown in Figure S1 (Supporting Information), the decomposition temperature of PDPP3T1 is above 400 °C at 5% weight loss.

Figure1shows the absorption spectra of the solution and thin film of PDPP3T1, which absorbs strongly around 836 nm in CHCl3solution. Thin film of PDPP3T1 possesses absorptions at 772 and 858 nm, corresponding to the 0-1 and 0-0 absorptions, respectively, according to previous reports.41Based on the cyclic voltammogram of PDPP3T1 (Figure S2, Supporting Information), highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) and lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) energies of PDPP3T1 were estimated to be −5.17 and −3.60 eV, respectively.

The surface pressure (π) versus mean monomeric area isotherm for PDPP3T1 was recorded on a Langmuir film balance by spreading a CHCl3solution of PDPP3T1 (0.045 mg mL−1) onto the water subphase at 25 °C. As depicted inFigure2, when the molecular area per monomer repeat unit is smaller than 100 Å2, the surface pressure starts to increase slowly. The surface pressure increases nearly linearly between 5 and 45 mN m−1by compressing the monolayer. But, when the surface pressure reaches 45 mN m−1, it ceases to rise with decreasing molecular area, indicating the collapse of the monolayer. Such isotherm manifests that monolayer of PDPP3T1 can be formed at the air–water interface. This can be attributed to the fact that PDPP3T1 entails amphiphilic side chains. According to previous studies,35,38the hydrophilic part (TEEG chains) of PDPP3T1 is assumed to be located in the water subphase, while the hydrophobic part of the polymer is expected to adopt a perpendicular orientation with respect to the water surface.

The monolayer of PDPP3T1 formed at the air–water interface was successfully transferred on OTS (n-octadecyltrichlorosilane) modified SiO2/Si substrate with the Langmuir–Schaefer technique at a surface pressure of about 40 mN m−1. Based on the consideration that the TEEG chains are located in the water subphase and the alkyl chains are orientated perpendicularly to the water surface, polymer chains are expected to pack in edge-on mode within the monolayer thin film.42Moreover, ultrathin films of PDPP3T1 were prepared by transferring the monolayers two, three, and five times, respectively. The corresponding ultrathin films were referred to as bilayer, three-layer, and five-layer thin films. These ultrathin films were dried in vacuum overnight at room temperature before AFM characterization.

Figure3shows AFM images of monolayer, bilayer, and three-layer ultrathin films. By scratching the respective film surfaces and measuring the heights of the steps, film thicknesses of monolayer, bilayer, and three-layer thin films were measured to be ≈2.5, 5.2, and 7.6 nm, respectively. The length between the end of branching alkyl chain and that of TEEG chain within PDPP3T1 was calculated to be 3.5 nm (see Scheme1). Thus, the side chains of PDPP3T1 are tilted on the substrate. Interestingly, film thicknesses of bilayer and three-layer thin films are almost two and three times of the monolayer thickness, demonstrating that multiple-layer thin films of PDPP3T1 can be prepared with Langmuir–Schaefer technique.

In comparison with those of bilayer and three-layer thin films, the surface of the monolayer thin film is more uniform and smooth. This agrees well with the low root-mean-square roughness (RRMS= 0.897 nm) for the monolayer thin film. Moreover, the substrate is not fully covered by the monolayer and pores with sizes in the range of 50–100 nm are formed. As is discussed below, the presence of pores within the monolayer thin film is beneficial for sensing. The bilayer and three-layer thin films contain domains of different sizes owing to the interpacking of polymer chains, and as a consequence theirRRMSare incremented to 1.11 and 3.12 nm, respectively. The deposition of additional layers onto the substrate also results in the reduction of pores within the respective ultrathin films.

Bottom-gate/top-contact (BGTC) FETs with ultrathin films of PDPP3T1, which were deposited on the substrate with the Langmuir–Schaefer technique and dried in vacuum at 25 °C, were fabricated (see the Supporting Information). The measurements for these FETs were conducted in air with a humidity of 15%–38%.Figure4and Figure S4 (Supporting Information) show the transfer and output characteristics for these FETs. As expected, the ultrathin films (from monolayer to multiple-layer) of PDPP3T1 display p-type semiconducting behavior. The hole mobility (µh) and current on/off (Ion/off) ratio as well as threshold voltage were deduced and listed inTable1. The hole mobility of the monolayer FET can reach 0.014 cm2V−1s−1with an averageµhof 0.008 cm2V−1s−1, which is among the highest charge mobility reported for FETs with ultrathin films prepared with Langmuir technique.29-35Moreover, the monolayer FET exhibits relatively highIon/off(104–106).µhincreased to 0.015 and 0.02 cm2V−1s−1for FETs with bilayer and three-layer ultrathin films, respectively. This mobility enhancement is likely due to the fact that nanopores which are present in the monolayer are largely reduced in the bilayer and three-layer thin films on the basis of the AFM images (see Figure3). But, the hole mobility becomes saturated by further increasing the thin-film thickness to five layers, as depicted inFigure5. Hole mobilities of these ultrathin films did not increase after thermal annealing at 100 °C. This agrees with previous reports that the semiconducting performance in FETs is primarily dominated by the first few layers near the dielectric layer.10-15This also indicates that the FET performance is determined by the inherent transport properties of the polymer PDPP3T1 in edge-on conformation rather than by the defects within the film. Similarly,Ion/offincreases with increasing the thickness of the thin films from monolayer to three-layer, but it keeps almost unchanged after further increasing to five-layer. TheVthis also slightly varied with the thickness of the ultrathin films (see Table1). More than ten FETs with each ultrathin film were fabricated. Figure S6 (Supporting Information) displays histograms of hole mobility distribution for FETs with monolayer, bilayer, three-layer, and five-layer PDPP3T1. Clearly, the hole mobility distribution is comparable to FETs with spin-coated thin films of conjugated D-A polymers.[40] Thus, the reproducibility of the device performance is satisfactory.

Furthermore, FETs with ultrathin films of PDPP3T1 show good operational stability. As an example, Figure S5a (Supporting Information) shows the transfer curves of the monolayer FET after forward and back voltage sweeping, and clearly the hysteresis is rather small. The ON current (Ion) and OFF current (Ioff) remain relatively constant after switching the device between ON (−100 V) and OFF (0 V) for 1000 times as depicted in Figure S5b (Supporting Information). Additionally, the air stability of FETs with ultrathin films of PDPP3T1 is satisfactory. As displayed in Figure S5c (Supporting Information),µhandIon/offdecrease slightly for the monolayer FET after being left in air for 14 d.

The presence of TEEG chains in PDPP3T1 is expected to endow the FETs with additional functionality. In the following, we demonstrate the utilization of the FET with monolayer of PDPP3T1 for sensing alcohol vapor with high sensitivity and good selectivity. Gaseous analytes used in the experiments were prepared by controllable dilution with air (with a humidity of 15%) and their concentrations were presented in the v/v form.Figure6a shows the variation of the transfer characteristics for the monolayer FET upon exposure to different concentrations of ethanol vapor. Both the off-current (atVGS= 5 V) and on-current (atVGS= −60 V) ofIDSdecreased when the monolayer FET was interacted with ethanol vapor. The reduction of on-current was still detectable when the concentration of ethanol vapor was as low as 1 ppb; moreover, the current variation was completed within seconds (see Figure6b). The control experiment reveals that the current variation can be neglected after exposure to air (with a humidity of 15%) (see Figure6c). But, the variation ofIDSbecame large when the humidity reached 32%. Therefore, the monolayer FET with PDPP3T1 shows high sensitivity toward ethanol vapor. The nanopores within the monolayer thin film may enable the ethanol molecules to interact with PDPP3T1 more easily, resulting in sensitive and fast responsiveness toward ethanol vapor. Notably, the semiconducting property is altered after exposure to ethanol vapor for the monolayer FET. The hole mobility was found to decrease after exposure of the monolayer FET to ethanol vapor as shown in Figure6d. For instance,µhdecreased from 0.008 cm2V−1s−1for the pristine monolayer FET to 0.003 cm2V−1s−1after the treatment with ethanol vapor with a concentration of 1000 ppb. Furthermore, the threshold voltage became more negative by increasing the concentration of ethanol vapor as depicted in Figure6d.

The selectivity of the monolayer FET of PDPP3T1 toward ethanol vapor was examined by exposing the device to CO2and vapors of other different volatile solvents. As depicted inFigure7a, the variation of on-current (IDS) was negligible after exposure to CO2and vapor of hexane with low polarity even at high concentration (202 ppm).IDSwas reduced only by ≈5% after the device was treated with vapors of polar solvents including CH2Cl2(307 ppm), ethyl acetate (1 ppm), and acetone (1 ppm). In comparison, large reduction ofIDS(over 20%) was observed for the monolayer FET after exposure to either methanol or ethanol or isopropanol vapors with concentration as low as 10 ppb. Moreover, among the alcohols the vapor of ethanol induced larger reduction ofIDS. The selective response of the monolayer FET toward alcohol vapors, in particular the ethanol vapor, can be attributed to the hydrophilic TEEG chains in PDPP3T1, which are expected to interact with alcohols with hydroxyl groups.

Apart from the monolayer FET, FETs with five-layer ultrathin film and spin-coated thin film of PDPP3T1 were also investigated for sensing alcohol vapors. Figure7b,c shows the variation ofIDSfor three FETs with monolayer, five-layer, and spin-coated thin films, respectively, after treatment with 1.0 ppm and 10 ppb of ethanol vapor, respectively. Clearly, the monolayer FET exhibits much higher response toward ethanol vapor. This can be attributed to the nanoporous surface morphology of the monolayer, which will make alcohol molecules to penetrate into the semiconducting layer easily.

In this paper, we report a new DPP-based semiconducting polymer PDPP3T1 in which each DPP unit is connected to both hydrophobic alkyl chain and hydrophilic TEEG chain. PDPP3T1 can form stable monolayer at the air–water interface. The monolayer and ultrathin films of increasing thickness from bilayer to five-layer can be successfully prepared with Langmuir–Schaefer method. Interestingly, the monolayer thin film entails nanopores with sizes of 50–100 nm based on the AFM images. The monolayer FET exhibits p-type semiconducting property with hole mobility (µh) up to 0.014 cm2V−1s−1, which is among the highest charge mobility reported for FTEs with ultrathin films prepared with Langmuir technique. Moreover, the averageµhincreases by increasing the thickness of the ultrathin film from monolayer to three-layer, and it reaches 0.015 and 0.02 cm2V−1s−1, respectively, for FETs with bilayer and three-layer PDPP3T1. But,µhkeeps almost unaltered by further increasing the thin film thickness. This result provides a new proof for the assumption that the semiconducting performance in FETs is primarily dominated by the first few layers near the dielectric layer. Furthermore, we demonstrate the application of the monolayer FET in sensing alcohol vapors, in particular ethanol vapor. The synergetic effects of TEEG chains in PDPP3T1 and the nanopores within the monolayers enable the monolayer FET to sense ethanol vapor sensitively and selectively with the detection limit as low as 1.0 ppb. These studies reveal that incorporation of functional groups into the side chains of conjugated polymers will open a new avenue for the development of functional FETs such as sensitive and selective sensors.

The authors thank the financial support of the Strategic Priority Research Program of the CAS (XDB12010300, XDA09020000), NSFC (21372226, 21190032, 21661132006), and 973 grant of MOST (No. 2013CB933501).

The authors declare no conflict of interest.

Please note: The publisher is not responsible for the content or functionality of any supporting information supplied by the authors. Any queries (other than missing content) should be directed to the corresponding author for the article.

Volume3,Issue11

Special Issue:Celebrating the 75th Birthday of Professor Daoben Zhu

November 2017

1700120

Copyright © 1999-2025John Wiley & Sons, Incor related companies. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence technologies or similar technologies.

Your password has been changed

Enter your email address below.

Please check your email for instructions on resetting your password.
                    If you do not receive an email within 10 minutes, your email address may not be registered,
                    and you may need to create a new Wiley Online Library account.

Can't sign in? Forgot your username?

Enter your email address below and we will send you your username

If the address matches an existing account you will receive an email with instructions to retrieve your username